# Jaws: The Story of a Hidden Epidemic

- INTRODUCTION
- The epidemic’s roots lie in cultural shifts in important daily actions we seldom think about; we just do them automatically. We don’t think about chewing, breathing, growing, or sleeping, or even the position of our jaws when we’re not eating or talking. Most of these actions we don’t acquire as habits, that is, by doing them repeatedly; they are inborn.
- Simple and normal actions, yes. But, we argue, if repeatedly done in certain ways, early in life especially, over time they can undermine your health and alter your appearance in some surprising ways.
- if you from an early age develop the habits of perpetually mouth breathing, eating mostly soft foods that require little chewing, and sleeping restlessly, snoring and squirming through every night, that could lead to distorted development of your jaws, face, and airway (the passage through which air enters and leaves the lungs) and to serious health problems later on—even to an early death.
- Modern industrialized societies are plagued by small jaws and crowded, ill-aligned teeth, a condition that the dental profession refers to as “malocclusion” (literally “bad bite”).
- Malocclusion is often accompanied by mouth breathing.
- Crooked teeth, other than their impact on appearance, are virtually harmless. Crooked teeth are, however, a signal of a more basic problem, poor development of the jaws. And distorted jaws influence more vital functions. For example, more than 10 percent of children may now have jaw-related potentially dangerous interrupted breathing at night;
- in one study in an urban area of Brazil, 55 percent of 23,596 children aged 3 to 9 years were mouth breathers.
- Consider: if just 10 percent of the people in the United States were in bed with the flu, all the mass media would be focused on the “flu epidemic.”
- Faces and health were left behind in the race to create that perfect movie-star smile.
- “myofunctional therapy” as a rising and popular form of treatment. The idea was that how you chew, how you swallow, and how you position your tongue, repeated thousands of times a day for your entire life, would result in changes to your teeth and your smile. Imagine if every time you swallowed you pushed your teeth out a bit; eventually your teeth should move outward.
- Usually health scientists depend on a statistical association, rather than clear knowledge of cause-and-effect mechanisms derived from experiments. For example, one seven-year investigation was done on middle-aged men in Sweden with sleep apnea—pauses in normal breathing when sleeping. Sleep apnea occurs when breathing during sleep is interrupted and the quality of sleep is impaired (during episodes the victim often moves from deep to shallow sleep). The afflicted men were found, when other likely causative factors are eliminated, to have more heart problems than those with uninterrupted sleep. In addition, effective treatment of the sleep apnea reduced the chances of cardiovascular problems.10 A similar Swedish study strongly suggested a causative connection of sleep apnea to coronary artery disease and stroke.11 Also suggestive, and frightening for those with sleep apnea, 46 percent of sudden deaths occurred between midnight and 6 am.
- The main kind of sleep apnea, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), is due to physical blocking of the airway.
- Sleep apnea also appears to generate mental problems, including lowered IQ, shortened attention span, and difficulties with memory.
- Sleep apnea is often not diagnosed, and statistics have not often been gathered on its prevalence, age of onset, and presence in the medical histories of individuals who develop other various chronic diseases that may be related.
- Escalating attempts to straighten teeth, to treat one of the epidemic’s most prominent symptoms, are one obvious indicator of the scale of the epidemic. Having braces
- Consider how you yourself breathe, chew, and position your mouth when not speaking or eating. Being aware of that can add up to better habits that might positively change your life, improve your health, perhaps make you more attractive and successful, and transform how you feel about yourself.
- here are some of the key questions you could be asking yourself: • Are the teeth of your upper and lower jaws usually in contact or apart? Are you breathing through your nose? • Do you usually sleep through the night? • Does your partner complain about you snoring? • How many times does your child chew each mouthful of food? • Is it good to wean your baby onto special “baby foods”? • Does your child almost always have a stuffy nose? • Does your little girl’s face make a “weird expression” when she’s swallowing? • Does she sleep with her mouth open? • Does she make a tangle of the covers? • Is she often tired?
- How we eat can be just as important as what we eat. How we breathe can be just as important as what’s in the air we
- breathe. How we sleep can be just as important as how long we sleep. These are all aspects of oral-facial health.
- Not only can problems in oral-facial health be an indicator of problems in the rest of your body, but they can also be a determinant of how good you look. The habits that can make faces unattractive in our culture are, sadly, the habits that can make bodies unhealthy.
- Overall, then, an unheralded change has been taking place in our society. We are altering our faces with surgery and braces and other technological means when the real changes we need to make are modifications in how we ordinarily breathe and eat and sleep. They can have a more significant and lasting improvement on the quality of our looks and our health than a plastic surgeon’s talents. Using quick fixes to solve our health problems and adjust our smiles may in some cases actually lead to additional problems in the long term.
- It also seems likely that oral-facial responses to the relatively new industrial-era environment are largely responsible for increases in sleep apnea, which is known to be very stressful. In turn, stress notoriously contributes to an array of serious chronic diseases. But evidence of the scale of stress and of its contributions to those diseases or the mechanisms that make the connection is often thin to nonexistent.
- Our upper jaw, which is technically known as our maxilla, seems as if it is just the base of our skull, but it is actually formed by two bones, one on each side, fused together.
- Our lower jaw, technically the mandible, is likewise made by the fusion of two bones.
- With extremely rare exceptions everyone is born with the DNA that allows normal development of teeth, jaws, and tongue. After all, for millions of generations individuals with a working combination had more offspring than those who couldn’t eat so well—natural selection in action.
- That “right” environment, we argue, is created by tough foods, much hard chewing, and, when not speaking or eating, holding the mouth closed with teeth in light contact and the tongue resting on the roof of the mouth (palate). That’s the environment in which the jaws should spend most of their time but especially at night when growth takes place.
- We have entered the space age with Stone Age genes that evolved to produce jaws adapted to a hunter-gatherer diet. This has had some unfortunate consequences.
- Does this mean that “environment” is more important than “genes”? Not really.
- To simplify thinking about gene–environment interactions, one can imagine that a person is like the area of a rectangle—a product of the width (genetic plans) and the length (environment in which those plans are executed).
- our species has brought genetic plans for Stone Age jaws into the 21st century—the jaws are a product of genes and environment, but the environment has changed dramatically over the course of a few millennia while the genes have not.
- Well-preserved skulls from four or five centuries ago show almost no malocclusion. In addition, there is much evidence supporting the anthropologists’ conclusion that jaws and faces do not grow to the same size and shape now that they once did.
- “Dental crowding in modern humans is considered the combined result of tool use to comminute [pulverize] foods and cooking to modify their mechanical properties, such as toughness.”
- As we’ll see, mouth breathing, especially from moving indoors32 and increasing allergies and stuffy noses (often from circulating colds in child-care centers) in children, appears to complete the story.
- Dentist and public health expert Jay W. Friedman estimated that roughly two-thirds of the extractions are unnecessary, “constituting a silent epidemic of iatrogenic [physician-caused] injury that afflicts tens of thousands of people with lifelong discomfort and disability.”
- CHAPTER 2 MOSTLY CHEWING
- People first began to supplement the food they got from men hunting and from women gathering plant materials (especially tubers), by encouraging valued plants to grow near their camps (agriculture) and encouraging animals to hang around (domestication). This had a series of important impacts. Agriculture made it possible for groups to become more sedentary and to develop surpluses. That in turn made it possible for some to specialize in non–food-producing activities—making tools (manufacturing), guarding camp and keeping order (soldiers), educating the young (teachers), placating evil spirits (priests)—building the foundations of what we think of as civilization.
- After people settled down, no longer was the main eating tool a knife, used to slice off a chunk of meat held between the hand and clenched teeth.6 Spoons doubtless appeared first because they were simply modifications of natural artifacts: shells, usefully shaped pieces of wood, and so on. Forks appeared later, probably as devices for manipulating meat while it was being cooked.
- Instead of mostly chewing tough meat, people began to consume cooked rice and other foods and to reduce tougher food to small pieces on their plate.
- Hard chewing, which took up something like half the day of our chimplike forebears who hadn’t discovered cooking, certainly declined with the use of fire to prepare food.
- “The mechanical forces generated by chewing food not only help your jaws grow to the right size and shape, they also help your teeth fit properly within the jaw.”10 Changes in chewing changed human jaws and faces.
- We speculate that the big jump in dining on soft foods (and malocclusion) started in the 19th century. That’s when the meat grinder was invented and hamburgers became a staple, ice cream was first wildly popular,13 mass-produced baby foods were first marketed,14 and, not coincidentally, we guess, canned foods became more popular.
- Some people think there is lesson for us in a famous 1930s experiment by Dr. Frances Pottenger whose subjects were not people but cats.15 Pottenger fed one group of cats soft cooked food and pasteurized milk and compared their development to that of cats that ate their traditional raw meat diet. The cats reared on cooked food grew to be smaller than their meat-eating counterparts, developed health problems, and were unable to reproduce.
- the central dietary issue related to jaw structure is not which nutrients it contains, but how much chewing it required.
- Corruccini’s more recent work on human beings also confirmed his conclusion that chewing was what counted in jaw development.
- The communities of bacteria that lived in our mouths for the millennia of hunting and gathering were critical to avoiding tooth decay. These bacterial communities were significantly transformed by the change in their environment when relatively sedentary hunter-gatherer groups started collecting wild plants rich in fermentable carbohydrates, and later by human diet changes associated with farming.29 The greater availability of carbohydrates and sugars, made more extreme by food processing, favored decay-causing bacteria, which now dominate the ecosystems of our mouths. Although the direct effects of the changing bacterial flora on the size of the jaw may be minor or even nonexistent, the “drifting” (natural movement from interactions of teeth with one another) of rotting teeth if not promptly treated will influence chewing and jaw development.
- Keeping the teeth out of contact will make the face grow longer.
- having a longer face will result in a more restricted airway and possibly prepare a child to suffer sleep apnea.
- Keeping the teeth apart leads to abnormal development of the jaw. That’s because teeth that are not in contact will tend to grow further out from the gum. When contact of the opposing teeth is causing pain, the tongue tends to drop to reduce the discomfort as a shock absorber draped over the teeth. With the tongue moving away from its ideal resting place fully pressed against the palate (upper jaw), the dental arch loses its “scaffold” and becomes more crowded. This, in turn, will have the effect of elongating the face as the upper jaw moves down and back, as a result of the lack of the normal contact of its teeth with those of the lower jaw. Because the lower jaw is hinged to the upper, the upper moves the lower back as well as down. This backward motion results in restriction of both the space for the teeth and tongue and the size of the airway
- So the preponderance of evidence shows that abundant chewing in youngsters paves the way for proper oral-facial development.
- CHAPTER 3 THE DIET, POSTURE, AND HOUSING REVOLUTIONS
- the “Great Leap Forward.”1 Suddenly (in terms of geological time) people could accomplish things rapidly not by changing their genes but by changing the body of nongenetic information their groups possessed—their culture.
- Although significant genetic change in human beings usually takes thousands of generations, tens of thousands of years, significant cultural evolution can occur within a generation or two, or even less.2
- it is what we do, what our oral posture and toughness of diet were when we were young, not the genes from our parents, that largely controls the size and basic health of our jaws and related details of configuration of our faces.
- In terms of the oral-facial health issues of this book, three core areas of cultural shift and influence appear paramount: 1: What we eat and how we eat it 2: Slack jaw and prevailing oral posture 3: Indoor living and how we breathe
- 1: What We Eat and How We Eat It
- Our jaws are built for a Stone Age diet, but we’re living in a Big Mac environment.
- The more you chew, especially in the childhood years, the stronger your jaw muscles become and the larger your jaws will grow.
- Relatively little chewing early in life can alter the development of your entire face, jaws, and airways.
- What we chew, we emphasize, is closely linked to how much we chew. Chewing too little, as we have seen, is a major cause of the escalating problems of malocclusion.
- In Nigeria and India, shifts to softer diets in cities were deemed responsible for smaller jaws in urban populations as compared with rural ones.
- The basic conclusion, we repeat, is clear—the tougher the food, the more you chew; the more you chew (especially when young), the more normal (and spacious) your jaws are.
- 2: Slack jaw and Prevailing Oral Posture
- Breathing and sleeping problems are only lightly tied to the many vexed questions about what foods our kids should eat but tightly tied to how tough those foods are.
- counterintuitively, breathing problems also seem to be related to how children rest their mouths and faces.
- To reiterate, it’s not just the food you eat and how you eat it but also what your mouth is doing when you are not eating, when your mouth is at rest;
- The correct oral posture, the one that appears most conducive to jaw development, is (when not speaking or eating) holding the mouth closed with teeth in light contact and the tongue resting on the roof of the mouth (palate), as shown in Chapter 1, Image 10.
- as you chew less hard foods, your jaw muscles get slack, and thus you hang your mouth open due to an underexercised and weakened jaw muscle.
- A child’s oral posture determines the direction of the growth of his face and its ultimate shape and attractiveness.
- Health professionals recognize that a patient who has a restricted airway will tilt her head back to open the airway. The small chin is an aspect of appearance, and the inadequate airway is an aspect of health.
- 3: Indoor Living and How We Breathe
- Breathing through your mouth effectively changes your mouth from a chewing device to a breathing device.
- some 10 percent of children in the United States suffer childhood asthma, which can prolong periods of stuffy noses related to viral upper respiratory infections.
- The faces and jaws of kids who mouth breathe develop differently from those of nose breathers,20 which can have serious health consequences through the stress of sleep disturbance.
- the way children rest their mouths, their oral posture, is a critical factor in determining their future health and appearance. Equally critical is how much and how hard they chew.
- Many of the problems of oral-facial health are caused by bad habits started young.
- CHAPTER 4 APPEARANCE
- it seems likely to us that around 20,000 years ago or more appearance started to become a significant factor in cultural evolution.
- Today people often use their clothes, especially uniforms, including the white uniforms of doctors and dentists, to signal a connection with something bigger than themselves.
- We thus bring Stone Age esthetic senses to a world of omnipresent digital imagery that greatly amplifies the ancient importance of how one looks.
- when it comes to faces—the focus of our concern in this book—certain features are generally considered attractive in our culture (for example, balanced features, nose not “too big” in relation to lips, and so on) or unattractive (such as a receding chin).
- We will be using the words attractive and unattractive as a shorthand for talking about current dominant cultural conceptions of appearance—of facial structure, jaw position, and the like.
- certain aspects of facial and jaw structure are surprisingly plastic, especially during development, and are shaped by cultural habits—how we eat, whether we breathe mainly through our nose or our mouth, how we position our jaws and tongue when not eating or talking, and so forth. In concert these can significantly affect our facial appearance.
- One of the jobs of our lower jaw and tongue is to promote the gradual upward and forward growth of the upper jaw so that it does not drop down and back. If kids habitually let their mouths hang open and chew mainly soft foods, their jaws cannot develop properly and will end up too far back, leading to a receding chin and, as we’ve seen, potentially encroaching on the size of their airway.
- Mouth breathing can change the shape of a child’s face and alter its appearance because the jaws are still growing. Results can include long, narrow faces and mouths, less defined cheekbones, relatively small lower jaws, and “weak” chins. Other facial symptoms may include smiles that reveal a lot of gums and, of course, crooked teeth.
- Partial contraction should be the normal resting state of skeletal muscles; that makes them ready to act and helps maintain posture.
- Those who don’t maintain tone well will likely struggle with chronic disease, such as back and knee pain as they get older.
- Lazy modern body posture exacerbates the problem of poor muscle tone; similarly, lack of jaw muscle tone at rest during a child’s growing years tends to stunt growth of the jaws and results in what many would consider a less-attractive face.
- appearance in any era is somewhat subjective, despite periodic attempts20 to establish enduring standards of beauty.
- There are also fairly consistent uniformities in studies showing that average features, youthfulness, symmetry, and perceived extent of masculinity or femininity of the face are all involved in assays of attractiveness.
- there are special brain areas involved in evaluating attractiveness that are different from those brain areas assigned the function of recognition of individual’s faces.
- There is substantial evidence that people judged by Western and Westernized societies (and by their standards) to be “handsome” or “beautiful” do better socially (and maintain better health) than those considered less attractive.
- There is also evidence that judgments of attractiveness are fairly consistent among different evaluators40 as well as cross-culturally.
- even babies as young as 6 months show signs of recognizing the cultural standards related to the attractiveness of adults.42 They looked longer at photos of people judged to be more attractive by adults. Here, as with adults, “averageness” seemed to be a major factor.
- As we have said, the epidemic can ultimately be traced to the hunter-gatherer genes now finding expression in industrialized societies, an environment quite different from that of our ancestors.
- CHAPTER 5 DEVELOPMENT AND ORAL POSTURE
- The optimal oral posture, we reiterate, is when the lips and jaws are closed when the mouth is resting, with upper and lower teeth in light contact and tongue pressing against the roof of the mouth.2 Poor oral posture can be a consequence of breathing difficulties,
- The anatomical evolution—the change in the DNA that made complex speech possible (along with the huge evolutionary advantage this brought in its wake)—at the same time narrowed the airway (a relatively small disadvantage).
- Infants are spared this threat because the dropping of the larynx and forming a single food–air channel doesn’t occur until a child is about 2 years old.
- Of course the sleep apnea epidemic is of much later vintage than the development of speech, so the anatomical shift that enabled human vocal language is by no means the whole story.
- “Breastfeeding is seen as a determining factor for proper craniofacial development, because it promotes intense exercise of the orofacial muscles, favorably stimulating the functions of breathing, swallowing, chewing, and speech production.”
- Not only is breastfeeding helpful in avoiding malocclusion, but pacifier use, in contrast, encourages the development of malocclusion,14 likely because it reduces the amount of breastfeeding.
- The bottom line is that sucking activities that do not provide milk—pacifiers, fingers, and so on, create malocclusion.
- Children today are seldom taught to chew their food thoroughly (20 times per mouthful), to keep their mouths closed when not eating or talking, and to breathe through their noses even when eating or talking.
- Equally or possibly more important are the weaker but more persistent pressures from muscles that keep lips and jaws closed at rest and the tongue against the palate. These gentle pressures cause the tongue, teeth, and palate to interact with each other and shape the living bone into the patterns set by millions of years of genetic evolution.
- differed solutions for coping with the novelty of mouth breathing generate different pressures on the flexible jaw development system.
- an important basic contributor to difficulties with oral-facial health: humanity’s shift to indoor living. That moved people into a situation reminiscent of the blocked nostrils suffered by Harvold’s monkeys: an allergen-rich environment ideal for producing stuffy noses.
- Blockage of the nose at an early age is frequently due not just to regular colds but, according to the “hygiene hypothesis,” also due to living in enclosed, allergen-rich spaces,31 while not having immune systems well “trained” by close contact with farm animals, infections, and “dirt” early in life.
- for ideal jaw-face-airway development there appears to be a critical period in the first decade (and perhaps more so in the first year or so) of life during which behavior must include proper oral posture (keeping the mouth closed), consuming “chewy” foods during and after weaning, and other factors we’ve discussed.
- After having poor oral posture during that critical period, returning to a normal path of jaw development has proven much more difficult, although there have not been scientific studies of the degree of success that can be achieved and the individual variance in it. The situation seems roughly analogous to that of a critical period of language acquisition in the first few years of life,45 though a few people retain the ability to pick up new languages effortlessly far into maturity.
- If during infancy the maxilla (upper jaw) receives insufficient occlusal (teeth in touch) and/or lingual (tongue) support it tends to drop down. The age of eight seems to be crucial as beyond this age the maxilla becomes progressively more firmly attached to the basi-cranium (base of the skull). By puberty it is relatively immobile unless moved by active appliances but the mandible remains adaptable for some years after this, particularly in boys.
- One result of the agricultural revolution, added on top of the earlier, trickier airway design that developed in support of the evolution of language, was earlier weaning made possible by the availability of softer cooked foods. That led to distorted muscle use as the complex muscular sucking of nursing was replaced by much simpler motions. This changed the basic patterns of oral development.
- Eventually, in the last few centuries, all those new influences on oral development contributed to a rapidly rising incidence of too-small jaws and badly fitting teeth.
- Mouth breathing is a compensation mechanism. When the mouth opens, the tongue is able to move forward away from the breathing tube, and breathing is easier, but the advantages of passing the air through the nose, described in Chapter 6, are lost.
- CHAPTER 6 DISORDERS OF BREATHING AND SLEEP
- Disruption of your breathing while you sleep can have nasty effects on your health,1 including heart health, diabetes,2 stroke, and mental disorders.3 Children with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) are more likely than other children to have poor learning skills, behavioral problems, ADHD, brain injury, and depression.4 One of the main symptoms indicating that a child is headed for such problems is mouth breathing.
- Poor oral posture typically leads, among other things, to mouth breathing—
- Some people who keep their mouth open still continue to be nasal breathers. For this reason John Mew prefers to use the more accurate “open mouth posture” to describe the problematic condition, but we’ll stick with the more familiar “mouth breathing.”
- Air taken in through the nose is warmed, moistened, and filtered, and small amounts of bactericidal nitric oxide,11 which may play a structural role in maintaining lung health,12 are added to the air before it goes to the lungs.
- The most common complaints of oral breathers are: breathlessness or respiratory failure, gets tired easily during physical activities, back or neck pain, olfaction and/or taste impairments, halitosis, dry mouth, wake up choking during the night, bad sleep, day time sleepiness, dark spots underneath the eyes, sneezing, abundant saliva when speaking, among others.
- As physical consequences, the oral breathing child has many physical traits: long face, dropped eyes, dark spots underneath the eyes, open lips, (sagging) and dry lips, narrow nostrils, (weak) cheek muscles, high palate, narrowing of the upper arch, and (malocclusion).
- Easy to observe symptoms that may signal someone is a mouth breather include: • Dry lips • Dry mouth • Snoring and open mouth while sleeping • Numerous airway illnesses, including sinus and ear infections and colds • Chronic bad breath • Swollen and red gums that bleed easily
- Mouth breathing can quickly dry out the mouth and decrease saliva production. Saliva is extremely important in neutralizing acid in the mouth and helping to wash away bacteria; without it, the chance of tooth decay increases.
- Dry mouth is one of the causes of gum disease, cavities, the inflamed gums of gingivitis that may advance to periodontitis, where microorganisms cause pockets to form around teeth, which loosens them from the gums. If left untreated, periodontitis can cause bacteria to gain access to the bloodstream, where they may, for instance, colonize heart valves and cause the serious disease of endocarditis.
- In children and adults, breathing through the mouth can also lead to poor sleep, lower oxygen concentration in the blood, and a habitual head-back posture to keep the airway open.
- Mouth breathing, which may result in hyperventilation (abnormally deep or fast breathing) and hypoxia (lessened ability to deliver oxygen to tissues that need them), may also cause asthma or make it worse.
- OSA usually involves blockage in the throat itself,
- common cause is problematic oral-facial development resulting in a jaw too small for the tongue to rest comfortably inside its confines; in these cases, the back of the tongue may fall into the throat, interrupting airflow.
- “Structural narrowing of the pharynx plays a critical role in most, if not all, cases of OSA. This is due to upper and lower jaws being recessed in the face. OSA would not exist if the upper and lower jaws were ideally placed in the face.”
- Anything that dramatically disturbs your breathing will be addressed by your autonomic nervous system (the system that does not require you to think before taking action). Such disturbance of breathing triggers the autonomic system’s “sympathetic” division to shift into an automatic “fight-or-flight” response—
- The minute your breathing is interrupted, you gasp to restore the oxygen flow to your lungs, and the sympathetic nervous system speeds up your heart, jacks up your blood pressure, has you gasp air through your mouth, and diverts blood to your leg muscles and away from organs and processes (gut, reproduction, growth) not immediately needed for survival. You subconsciously prepare to run, fight, climb, or do whatever is required to stay alive.
- Mouth breathing is obviously a great benefit if you are being chased; it gets more oxygen to your lungs and bloodstream to power very hardworking muscles. Growth is turned off when all your energy is channeled into saving your life—allowing for growth another day. As stress expert Robert Sapolsky22 put it: an antelope fleeing from a lioness doesn’t have the time or energy to grow antlers.
- “improving nasal breathing in snorers increases nocturnal growth hormone release.”
- Breathing disruption triggers the same sort of stress response that prepares your body for combat, when it should be enjoying restorative sleep.27 You’re trying to rest, but at the same time you’re struggling to supply your brain with the necessary oxygen.
- In sleep apnea cases, where the intake of oxygen is intermittently limited or nonexistent, the brain responds by shutting down all programs that are not essential to survival.
- By trying repeatedly to make these critical adjustments, the brain is wreaking havoc on itself, creating destruction in a key part involving memory (hippocampus) that can’t ever be healed.
- Impaired nighttime breathing, along with the other stresses of modern life, can put us in “sympathetic overdrive,” which can have disastrous long-term effects on the human body, including heart and blood vessel disease.29 This apparently happens because sleep apnea elevates blood pressure—
- Snoring is a sign of a restricted airway, of possible sleep apnea, and can be associated with heart disease,31 but snorers do not suffer the total interruptions of breathing that afflict victims of sleep apnea.
- Frequent intake of alcohol, tobacco smoke, and other drugs, as well as obesity,38 can also bring on or worsen snoring.
- research shows that “primary snoring” (snoring in individuals without OSA) in childhood causes problems in attention and memory,41 greatly increases the chances of having an epileptic seizure,42 and can be a warning sign of developing more serious problems.
- Unfortunately, many physicians often blame childhood snoring on tonsils, adenoids, and allergies, missing out on one likely root cause—poor oral-facial health.
- Sleep specialist Dr. James O’Brien has said, “Anyone who snores will develop obstructive sleep apnea, if they live long enough.”
- Stephen Sheldon, sleep specialist at Lourie’s Children’s Hospital in Chicago and author of Principles and Practice of Pediatric Sleep Medicine, estimated that 75 percent of children with ADHD could trace their problem to sleep-disordered breathing.
- OSA unfortunately often develops without a victim or a parent being aware of it and can affect a person’s well-being from an early age.
- sleep-disordered breathing can significantly degrade a child’s mental functioning.
- disturbed sleep reduces the brain’s ability to think and control behavior, and different deficits are related to different degrees of apnea.
- People who grind and clench their teeth usually have unevenly erupting teeth where some make contact with those of the opposite jaw well before others.
- If proper oral posture is maintained at least 8 hours a day, with the teeth lightly in contact, the teeth of the upper and lower jaws will maintain their relationship so that all meet evenly and bruxism is avoided.
- When considering the ills to which mouth breathing and OSA “may contribute” remember that does not mean “does contribute”; “is associated with” is not the same as “causes.”
- Our goal is to make you aware of the many possible consequences of poor oral-facial health, not to convince you that a child who is a mouth breather is condemned to a short life of misery or that correcting its jaw development will guarantee a long, healthy, happy life.
- maxillomandibular advancement surgery (MMA), which involves moving the upper and lower jaws forward, is the only real alternative for curing adults with particularly serious cases of OSA.
- The connection between obesity and OSA is a result of an increasing neck circumference associated with weight gain.75 Large fat deposits around the airway put pressure on the pharynx, narrowing it in some cases to dangerous levels.
- The only truly effective way to cope with the OSA epidemic is to recognize its seriousness and to treat its potential development in the first decade of life through postural training if needed and, sometimes, corrective action.
- CHAPTER 7 WHAT CAN YOU DO?
- At present the recommendation is that exclusive breastfeeding should last about six months.
- Equally important is how babies are weaned. Weaning should not be a single act, but, for proper oral-facial development, ideally it should also stretch over a substantial time. Wean with solid foods that will keep the jaws moving as much as possible, taking care to watch for choking.
- Avoid the pap called “baby foods,” almost all of which are soft and sweet,4 and other soft processed foods.
- Overall, it seems best to prolong breastfeeding after the introduction of alternate food, and the kids should be started as early as possible on alternatives that are solid and not sweet.
- One method to consider is “baby-led weaning” (BLW),6 which simply means letting your child feed himself from the beginning of the weaning.
- when it’s time to eat the mother continues to offer milk (the ideal is for the milk to be breast milk) until the child auto-weans.
- parents should teach them good chewing habits.
- The ideal oral-facial resting position entails three things: lips closed, tongue on the palate, and teeth touching lightly together.
- Close your baby’s lips lightly with your fingers for a few seconds when she finishes nursing.
- There is only limited information on the relationship between oral posture and overall posture,10 but it seems likely that head-forward posture is related to malocclusion.
- Parents should also keep an eye on children’s sleep. If they’re routinely tired in the morning, one of two things is likely occurring: either bedtime is too late at night or early symptoms of sleep disorder breathing are manifesting.
- Remember that airway distortions tracing to poor oral-facial development can be a great enemy of adequate rest.
- Minimizing inhalation of particles as well as doing what you can to keep the nose at peak performance should be a priority if you are concerned with the oral-facial health epidemic and its consequences.
- Simple training in hand washing has been shown to significantly reduce colds among the children under 2 years old,21 an important time for jaw development.
- Many parents complain that because their kids have allergies, they can’t breathe through their nose. But consider the possibility that in some cases mouth breathing, taking many more particles into the lungs than would occur through nose breathing, may actually be the root of the problem.
- it may be mouth breathing that invites in allergens, which in turn leads to stuffy noses, and the cycle continues with further mouth breathing as a result.
- According to Buteyko, normal breathing: • Should not be seen. • Should not be heard. • Should involve a closed mouth (with the lips in slight contact). • If breath is seen, heard, or done with the mouth open, it is overbreathing.
- The three Buteyko activities that Sandra believes are particularly effective in promoting nose breathing are sleeping with a tape over the mouth, counting steps, and unclogging the nose.
- Tape Patients without any other severe problem (such as a deviated septum or severe allergies) who mouth breathe are encouraged by Buteyko therapists to place a piece of hypoallergenic tape or Micropore over their lips at bed time. It’s harmless and easily broken through or removed, but in the meantime the tape serves as a reminder when the impulse to mouth breathe arises.
- steps The count of steps is an exercise in which patients pinch their nose and walk while someone counts the number of steps they can take without breathing through either nose or mouth. This activity is usually done under the supervision of a certified Buteyko therapist. With this practice of breath control, the number of steps will increase as the patient becomes fitter.
- Unclogging the nose Here’s the way to do unclog your nose, according to Buteyko specialist Patrick McKeown.28 Try it yourself the next time you have nasal congestion: • Sit down. • Take a small breath in through your nose. • This breath should make no noise. • Breathe out through your nose. • Then pinch your nose with your fingers so that the air cannot come in or go out. • Gently nod your head up and down. • Do this for as long as you can. • When you need to breathe in, then breathe in through your nose only and try not to let the air sneak in through your mouth. • Calm your breathing as quickly as possible. • Wait about half a minute and practice this again. Your nose will be unblocked by the third attempt. If it is not; practice this again until your nose is unblocked. • If your nose becomes blocked again; practice the exercise again.
- By learning to adopt the ideal rest position in between bursts of mouth activity (chewing or speaking), the brain learns the default position through repetition, and the proper rest posture will come to be held unconsciously through much of the day.
- The GOPex exercises train children to: • Chew as if they mean it • Swallow with their teeth together • Close their mouths when not in…
- Here are the essential GOPex instructions designed to help children find and maintain correct oral posture.30 First, an exercise to build good jaw-muscle tone: Meaningful Chewing. Reserve 2 to 3 minutes for at least one meal a day to focus fully on chewing. Always chew your food until it liquefies. This will aid digestion and, more importantly, the amount of chewing required will help build sufficient muscle tone to maintain a good closed-mouth posture. With each mouthful of soft food, try to build up to a minimum of chewing 15 times before swallowing, and try 20 chews for hard food. As your muscles get stronger, you may not need as much chewing before your food liquefies. Always chew with lips together and always begin your swallow with teeth of upper and lower jaws touching. Consciously pause for at least a 2 seconds before starting the swallow. Focus on the pause. Second, two exercises to encourage nasal-only breathing: Counting Exercise: Counting out loud slowly from 1 to 60 (30 for the very young). Pause between every number and touch your teeth together and your lips together only once. After each five counts, pause to breathe through your nose. Repeat this exercise at least once every morning and once every evening. All in-breaths should be through the nose and only on every count of 5; out-breaths can be through your nose or naturally through your mouth as you count out loud. Reading-Out-Loud Exercise: Speaking with good punctuation is an excellent practical application of nasal-only breathing. Take 5 to 20 minutes each day to read aloud, pausing at each comma and full stop in the sentence to close your mouth and breathe “in” only through your nose. Third, we have suggestions to make good oral posture your natural state. Incorporate the exercises just described into your everyday life. Here are some suggestions on how to achieve this: • To further develop controlled breathing and increase your stamina, concentrate on nose breathing when exercising. When you speak, pause regularly, inserting “punctuation” between ideas, and inhale only through your nose. Take time each day (perhaps with another family member) to do some conversational exercise with the goals of keeping your mouth closed when not speaking and breathing exclusively through your nose as much as feasible. • Start with walking and keeping your mouth gently but completely sealed. Try…
- Chewing gum properly is something everyone can benefit from regardless of age or problem. Here’s the appropriate chewing protocol: • Chew a minimum of 30 minutes a day. • Chew on both sides; for younger kids, supervise that they chew five times on each side. If they favor a side, consult the dentist because there may be a problem (such as a tooth decay). • Chew with closed lips, breathing exclusively through the nose. • When chewing, make long pauses and pay attention to how long you can keep teeth in contact as you swallow. Push your tongue solidly to the palate when swallowing. You are working on muscle memory, and you should repeat this pattern when you eat.
- Just learning to keep teeth in light contact at rest can have amazing benefits in well-being as well as in esthetic improvement.
- A correct swallow stimulates the palate (maxilla, roof of the mouth) to grow upward and outward, widening the dental arch and making more room for the teeth.
- CHAPTER 8 ORTHODONTISTS, DENTAL ORTHOPEDISTS, ORTHOTROPISTS, AND FORWARDONTISTS
