# Livewired: The Inside Story of the Ever-Changing Brain

- 1 THE ELECTRIC LIVING FABRIC
- But this isn’t even the best part about humans; there’s something more astonishing. Our machinery isn’t fully preprogrammed, but instead shapes itself by interacting with the world. As we grow, we constantly rewrite our brain’s circuitry to tackle challenges, leverage opportunities, and understand the social structures around us.
- Every fond memory it possesses, every lesson it learns, every drop of information it drinks—all these fashion its circuits to develop something that was never pre-planned, but instead reflects the world around it.
- The human brain consists of eighty-six billion cells called neurons: cells that shuttle information rapidly in the form of traveling voltage spikes.
- The brain is a dynamic system, constantly altering its own circuitry to match the demands of the environment and the capabilities of the body.
- The elaborate pattern of connections in the brain—the circuitry—is full of life: connections between neurons ceaselessly blossom, die, and reconfigure. You are a different person than you were at this time last year, because the gargantuan tapestry of your brain has woven itself into something new.
- Although DNA is a part of the story of your life, it is only a small part. The rest of the story involves the rich details of your experiences and your environment, all of which sculpt the vast, microscopic tapestry of your brain cells and their connections. What we think of as you is a vessel of experience into which is poured a small sample of space and time. You imbibe your local culture and technology through your senses. Who you are owes as much to your surroundings as it does to the DNA inside you.
- Dropping into the world with a half-baked brain has proven a winning strategy for humans.
- Instead, our genetics bring about a simple principle: don’t build inflexible hardware; build a system that adapts to the world around it. Our DNA is not a fixed schematic for building an organism; rather, it sets up a dynamic system that continually rewrites its circuitry to reflect the world around it and to optimize its efficacy within it.
- neurons are locked in competition for survival. Just like neighboring nations, neurons stake out their territories and chronically defend them. They fight for territory and survival at every level of the system: each neuron and each connection between neurons fights for resources. As the border wars rage through the lifetime of a brain, maps are redrawn in such a way that the experiences and goals of a person are always reflected in the brain’s structure.
- The brain distributes its resources according to what’s important, and it does so by implementing do-or-die competition among all the parts that make it up.
- The brain chronically adjusts itself to reflect its challenges and goals. It molds its resources to match the requirements of its circumstance. When it doesn’t possess what it needs, it sculpts it.
- The concept of a system that can be changed by external events—and keep its new shape—led the American psychologist William James to coin the term “plasticity.” A plastic object is one that can be shaped, and it can hold that shape.
- A city is not designed by urban planners and then immobilized like a plastic ornament. It incessantly develops. Just like cities, brains never reach an end point.
- The thrill of life is not about who we are but about who we are in the process of becoming.
- 2 JUST ADD WORLD
- Brains are not born into the world as blank slates. Instead, they arrive pre-equipped with expectations.
- for humans at birth, the brain is remarkably unfinished, and interaction with the world is necessary to complete it.
- 3 THE INSIDE MIRRORS THE OUTSIDE
- It’s the same with neurons. They spend a small fraction of their time sending abrupt electrical pulses (also called spikes). The timing of these pulses is critically important. Let’s zoom in to a typical neuron. It reaches out to touch ten thousand neighbors. But it doesn’t form equally strong relationships with all ten thousand. Instead, the strengths are based on timing. If our neuron spikes, and then a connected neuron spikes just after that, the bond between them is strengthened. This rule can be summarized as neurons that fire together, wire together.
- neurons that are active close in time to one another tend to make and maintain connections between themselves. That’s how a map of the body emerges in the darkness.
- Without competition, colonization is easy, but in the face of rivalry holding on to territory requires constant work. The same story plays out constantly in the brain. When a part of the body no longer sends information, it loses territory.
- We suggest that dreaming exists to keep the visual cortex from being taken over by neighboring areas. After all, the rotation of the planet does not affect anything about your ability to touch, hear, taste, or smell; only vision suffers in the dark. As a result, the visual cortex finds itself in danger every night of a takeover by the other senses. And given the startling rapidity with which changes in territory can happen (remember the forty to sixty minutes we just saw), the threat is formidable. Dreams are the means by which the visual cortex prevents takeover.
- This combination crafts the experience of dreaming: the invasion of the electrical waves into the occipital cortex makes the visual system active, while the muscular paralysis keeps the dreamer from acting on the experiences.
- Dreams, therefore, may be the strange love child of neural plasticity and the rotation of the planet.
- two other brain areas, the hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex, are less active during dream sleep than during the waking state, and this presumably accounts for our difficulty remembering our dreams.
- 4 WRAPPING AROUND THE INPUTS
- your three pounds of brain tissue are not directly hearing or seeing any of the world around you. Instead, your brain is locked in a crypt of silence and darkness inside your skull. All it ever sees are electrochemical signals that stream in along different data cables. That’s all it has to work with.
- the brain a very efficient kind of machine. It is a general-purpose computing device. It just sucks up the available signals and determines—nearly optimally—what it can do with them.
- The all-purpose cortex idea suggests how new sensory skills can be added during evolution: with a mutated peripheral device, a new data stream makes its way into some swath of the brain, and the neural processing machinery gets to work. Thus, new skills require only the development of new sensory devices.
- Sensory substitution: feed information into the brain via unusual pathways.
- If I’m looking at you, the image of you doesn’t get beyond my retina….From there to the brain to the rest of the brain, it’s pulses. Pulses along nerves. Those pulses aren’t any different from the pulses along the big toe. It’s [the] information that [they carry], and the frequency and the pattern of pulses. If you could train the brain to extract that kind of information, then you don’t need the eye to see.
- Any patch of cortex is pluripotent—meaning that it has the possibility to develop into a variety of fates, depending on what’s plugged into it.
- Consider where the fish markets are in the middle United States: the towns in which pescatarianism thrives, in which sushi restaurants are overrepresented, in which new seafood recipes are developed—let’s call these towns the primary fishual areas. Why does the map have a particular configuration, and not something different? It looks that way because that’s where the rivers flow, and therefore where the fish are. Think of the fish like bits of data, flowing along the data cables of the rivers, and the restaurant distribution crafts itself accordingly. No legislative body prescribed that the fish markets should move there. They clustered there naturally.
- In 2000, scientists at MIT redirected inputs from a ferret’s eye to the auditory cortex so that now the auditory cortex received visual data. What happened? The auditory cortex adjusted its circuitry to resemble the connections of the primary visual cortex.19 The rewired animals interpreted inputs to the auditory cortex like normal vision.
- Hundreds of studies on transplanting tissue or rewiring inputs support the model that the brain is a general-purpose computing device—a machine that performs standard operations on the data streaming in—whether those data carry a glimpse of a hopping rabbit, the sound of a phone ring, the taste of peanut butter, the smell of salami, or the touch of silk on the cheek.
- the brain figures out how to extract shape information from incoming signals, regardless of the path by which those signals get into the inner sanctum of the skull—whether by sight, touch, or sound. The details of the detectors don’t matter. All that matters is the information they carry.
- Whatever data the brain receives, it makes use of.
- With the proper data streaming in, the prediction is that the brain will come to have a direct perceptual experience of manufacturing, or different hashtags, or the real-time economic movements of the planet. The qualia will develop over time; they are the brain’s natural way of summarizing large amounts of data.
- On an evolutionary timescale, if random genetic mutations manage to translate some source of information into electrical signals, the brain can treat them as plug and play, deciphering whatever information flows in. Plug eyes into a patch of cortex and it will become a visual cortex, plug ears into it and it will become an auditory cortex, plug skin in and it becomes somatosensory.
- 5 HOW TO GET A BETTER BODY
- the motor areas optimize themselves to drive the available machinery.
- whether hands or talons or wings—the fundamental principles of brain operation don’t need to be redesigned each time. The motor system simply figures out how to drive the available machinery.
- Building a babbling, self-exploring robot is more effective and more flexible than programming the robot to move in predetermined ways. And in the animal kingdom, nature has only some tens of thousands of genes with which to build a creature, so it cannot possibly preprogram all of the actions one might do in the world. Its only choice? Build a system that figures itself out.
- By babbling with their bodies, they try out various moves, postures, positions, and balances, and they assess the results. Does leaning to the left convey me along the wave, or dump me in the cold water? Does pushing with my rear leg while leaning keep the skateboard moving and my master squawking with delight, or does it cause a painful crash into a fire hydrant? The feedback allows the motor system to fine-tune millions of parameters and perform better the next time around. In this way, the organism builds a model of its body’s interaction with the world. It comes to grasp its capacities and the consequences of its movements. It comes to know what the environment allows. By this constant loop of feedback, the baby, the athletic dogs, and the Starfish robot learn how to navigate their body plans.
- The loop of putting out actions and evaluating the feedback is the key to understanding not just motor babbling but also social babbling.
- just like the human who at different times operates a mountain bike, ice skates, and a hang glider, we adopt different schemas for different social situations.
- Because most of the brain’s learning takes place in this loop, it is no surprise that motor and sensory maps typically change hand in hand with each other. For example, when monkeys are forced to reach for their food with a rake, their motor and somatosensory maps both reorganize to include the length of the tool. The rake literally becomes part of their body.15 The motor and sensory systems are not fundamentally independent but instead yoked in an unbroken cycle of feedback.
- 6 WHY MATTERING MATTERS
- We’ve seen how the brain reorganizes in response to its inputs, but the fact is that not all information streaming into the pipelines is equally important. How brains adjust themselves has everything to do with what you’re spending your time on.
- If you decide to make a career change to ornithology, more of your neural resources will become devoted toward learning the subtle differences between birds
- Brain circuitry comes to reflect what you do, and so the cortex of a highly trained musician morphs into something measurably different—in a way that you can see on brain imaging,
- Brains reflect not simply the outside world but more specifically your outside world.
- You’re more than what you eat; you become the information you digest.
- To understand what’s happening in the brain, think of a hilly landscape. For a raindrop to end up in a lake, it doesn’t need to land directly in the water; instead, it only needs to hit the encircling hillsides. Whether it lands on the northern slope or the southern, whether on the eastern incline or the western, it will slide down into the lake. Similarly, the feeling on your thigh doesn’t have to be a buzzing phone. It can be a slight shift of your jeans, or a twitch of your thigh muscle, or an itch, or a graze past a sofa. As long as the feeling is close, the signals slide down the landscape to their conclusion: it’s an important message that you can’t wait to check. The landscape gets formed by what is important in your world.
- a baby born in Japan (call him Hayato) and a baby born in America (call him William). From their brains’ point of view, there’s nothing different about them. But in Osaka, Hayato hears Japanese all around him from day one. In Palo Alto, William hears the tones of English, where different sounds carry meaning. An example of what the two babies hear differently is the distinction between the R and L sounds. In English these carry information (right versus light, raw versus law), but in Japanese there is no such distinction between these two sounds. As a result, William’s internal landscape builds a mountain range between his interpretation of R and L, such that the difference between these two sounds is perceptually clear. In Hayato’s brain, the landscape develops into a valley, such that both R and L flow into the identical interpretation; as a result, Hayato cannot hear the difference between these two sounds.
- A brain’s goals play a critical role in how and when it changes.
- change is tied to anything that is relevant to your goals.
- Using relevance as its North Star, the brain flexibly picks up on important details. Its billions of neurons serve as a colossal canvas for painting the world we happen to find ourselves in, and with it we develop expertise in whatever has relevance to us, whether basketball, theater, badminton, Greek classics, cliff jumping, video gaming, line dancing, or wine making. When a task is roughly aligned with our larger goals, our brain circuitry comes to reflect it.
- The presence of acetylcholine at a particular brain area tells it to change, but it doesn’t tell it how to change.
- While acetylcholine turns on plasticity, other neurotransmitters (such as dopamine) are involved in the direction of change, encoding whether something was punishing or rewarding.
- Your brain adjusts itself according to what you spend your time on, as long as those tasks have alignment with rewards or goals.
- 7 WHY LOVE KNOWS NOT ITS OWN DEPTH UNTIL THE HOUR OF SEPARATION
- The activity of particular neurons in your visual cortex represents downward motion, and the activity of other neurons represents upward motion. They’re always locked in battle. Most of the time, the competition is evenly pitched, and they evenly inhibit each other. As a result, the world appears to be moving neither up nor down.
- The system always wants to set up a ground truth so that it can be better at detecting change.
- Just as with Aristotle’s horse or the waterfall or the post-boating wobbles, your brain is readjusting its expectations about the world—in
- brains care about change.
- Successful adaptation makes regularities invisible.
- When brain circuitry adjusts, it’s making a guess about what the world is likely to be in the next moment. It stops talking about news that is expected to continue.
- Your brain doesn’t want to pay the energy cost of spiking neurons, so the goal is to reconfigure the network to waste as little power as possible. If a pattern streams in that is predictable—or even partially guessable—the system saves energy by structuring itself around that input so as not to be surprised by it.
- an energy-conscious brain wants to predict away everything possible so that it can save its energy for just representing the unexpected.
- Attending allows you to put your high-resolution sensors on the problem and figure out how to incorporate it into your model.
- The difference between predictions and outcomes is the key to understanding a strange property of learning: if you’re predicting perfectly, your brain doesn’t need to change further.
- changes in the brain happen only when there’s a difference between what was expected and what actually happens.
- infotropism. This hypothesis suggests that neural circuitry constantly shifts to maximize the amount of information it can extract from the environment.
- infotropism: the brain maximizes its resources to interpret whatever data flows in.
- Just as the plant seeks sunlight and the bacteria seeks sugar, the brain seeks information. It tries to constantly change its circuitry to maximize the data it can draw from the world. To that end, it builds an internal model of the outside, which equates to its predictions. If the world proceeds as expected, the brain saves energy.
- Fundamentally, the brain is a prediction machine, and that is the driving engine behind its constant self-reconfiguration. By modeling the state of the world, the brain reshapes itself to have good expectations, and therefore to be maximally sensitive to the unexpected.
- 8 BALANCING ON THE EDGE OF CHANGE
- The brain gives the illusion that it is settled into stillness, but the principles of competition poise it on the hair-trigger edge of change. Don’t let the calm fool you: neural networks appear settled only because every region is trapped in a cold war, tightly wound, ready to compete for the future borders of the internal globe.
- What happens when disease, surgery, or brain damage result in less available territory? Just as with neighboring countries, there are two possibilities. The brain might leave out the parts of the map corresponding to the missing tissue, or the brain might squish the original map on a smaller piece of real estate.
- maps can compress and share territory when necessary.
- Can a map also stretch if more territory is available? To find out, researchers removed one-half of the retina. Now only half of the normal number of optic fibers reached the normal sized territory of the optic tectum. What happens in this case? The map (now encoding only one-half of visual space) spreads out to utilize the entire tectum.
- neural maps are not predefined by a genetic urban planning commission. Instead, whatever real estate is available gets used and filled.
- brain maps stretch, squish, and relocate their functions.
- neurotransmission: the release of a small amount of a chemical messenger from a neuron. The chemical binds to receptors on another cell, causing a little blip of electrical or chemical activity. In this way, neurons send messages to one another.
- alternating stripes in the visual cortex of mammals carry signals from either the left eye or the right eye. Under normal circumstances, each eye controls an equal split of the real estate. But if one eye is patched shut early in its life, the stronger input from the other eye begins to take over more territory.
- In other words, maps in the visual cortex can be drastically changed by experience:
- This demonstrated two things. First, that these maps are not purely innate. Second, maintaining territory in the brain is activity-dependent: preserving ground requires constant vigor. As inputs diminish, neurons change their connections until they find where the action is.
- Maintaining territory requires constant input to the individual neurons: when effort slows, they seek to switch teams to the active inputs.
- The areas that send the most information win the largest representation.
- So the right way to think about the system is that there is competition at small levels, and we get emergent properties (stretching, shrinking, sharing) at higher levels. As the local wars rage through a lifetime, the brain’s maps are redrawn. And this is because each neuron confronts the same challenge as the urban drug dealer: find an open niche, and then spend all your time defending it.
- neurotrophins.10 These proteins, secreted by the neurons’ targets, are the currency for which the neurons and synapses compete. It drives them to make and stabilize connections. Neurons that are successful at getting these life-preserving chemicals thrive. Unsuccessful neurons try reaching their branches elsewhere. If they are successful nowhere, they eventually die.
- Beyond seeking the reward of these chemicals, neurons also avoid the danger of toxic factors. For example, synaptotoxins eliminate existing synapses,11 and axons vie to escape these punishing effects by remaining active: as soon as they drop below a threshold, they are eliminated.12
- In this way, the multilayered language of attractive and repulsive molecules provides the feedback that allows neurons to determine whether they should remain at their posts, blossom, shrink, slink somewhere else, or remove themselves for the sake of the common good.
- There are two types of neurons: those that transmit messages that stimulate their neighbors (excitatory) and those that thwart their neighbors (inhibitory).
- together they determine how flexible the system is.
- many neural connections already exist, but are so inhibited that their presence has no function. A release from inhibition is the step that allows them to be heard.
- as a result of disinhibition, the widespread and previously silent projections become functionally operative.
- Even in the adult brain, primary auditory fibers reach directly into primary visual cortex, and vice versa.19 And this cross-stitching is what can allow rapid redeployment when necessary.
- general principle of reorganization is that the brain conceals a great many silent connections. These are normally inhibited and don’t contribute much of anything. But they’re available if needed in the future. Leveraging these, the brain can respond rapidly to changes in input. However, these silent connections are limited in number, and for longer, more widespread change a different approach is used: if short-term changes are found to be useful to the animal, then long-term changes (such as the sprouting of new synapses and growth of new axons) will eventually follow.
- There are two ways that cells die. If they don’t get enough nutrients (say, blockage of an artery leaves the tissue starving for blood), then the cells die a sloppy sort of death, in which inflammatory chemicals leak out and cause damage in the local neighborhood. This is known as necrosis. But the second way cells can die is by apoptosis, in which they neatly commit suicide. They purposefully fold up shop, take care of their affairs, and consume themselves.
- In embryonic development, the trajectory from a webbed hand to clearly defined fingers depends on sculpting away cells, not adding them.
- 9 WHY IS IT HARDER TO TEACH OLD DOGS NEW TRICKS?
- the younger the soldier was when he got injured, the better he was now; the older the soldier, the more permanent the damage.
- The brain matures like the planet. Through years of border disputes, neural maps become increasingly solidified.
- An older brain cannot easily reassign settled territories for new tasks, while a brain at the dawn of its wars can still reimagine its maps.
- “Every man is born as many men and dies as a single one.”
- Broad optionality reduces to the standard.
- brains begin with many possible routes through the neural networks; with time, the practiced pathways become difficult to exit. Unused paths become thinned away. Neurons that can’t find success with the world eventually fold up shop and commit suicide.
- The upside is that you end up with lightning-fast ways of solving problems. The downside is that it’s harder to attack problems with wild unstructured inventiveness.
- brains are most flexible at the beginning, in a window of time known as the sensitive period.
- If there’s input to pick up on, the baby will do so, as long as that input arrives within the sensitive period. After that door swings shut, it becomes too late to learn the fundamentals of communication.
- Generally, if you arrive in a new country during your first seven years, your fluency in the new tongue will be as high as a native speaker’s, because your window of sensitivity for obtaining the sounds is still open.
- Your ability to sonically morph into a different culture is a door that remains open for only about a decade.
- This may mean that the cortex’s capacity for change is counterbalanced by at least some genetic pre-specification.
- The influence of developmental timing is found across all the senses.
- If you were to take up the violin for the first time in your teens, there is no possibility that you would become a Perlman. Even if you worked harder to rack up the same number of hours of practice, your brain is already behind in the race: it has grown too solidified by the time of your first adolescent pizzicato.
- The brain needs to experience the proper input within the right window to achieve its most useful connectivity.
- As a result of the diminishing flexibility, we are highly influenced by events in our childhoods.
- As Aristotle noted twenty-four hundred years ago, “The habits we form from childhood make no small difference, but rather they make all the difference.”
- DOORS CLOSE AT DIFFERENT RATES
- It’s a fast-swinging door for geese to imprint on their parent. But the geese can still learn other things later in life, such as where the river is, where to best seek food, and the identities of other geese they meet in adulthood.
- Sensitive periods are different for different tasks of the brain. Not all brain regions are equally plastic in terms of how flexibly they begin and how long they retain their adaptability.
- Different areas of the brain operate on different schedules of plasticity.
- One possibility is that the different sensitive periods are caused by different underlying learning strategies of different regions.16 In this view, some regions are geared to learn throughout life, because they are meant to encode changeable details of the world.
- In contrast, other brain areas are involved in stable relationships—such as the building blocks of vision, how to chew food, or the general rules of grammar—and these areas require a faster lockdown.
- I suggest a new hypothesis: the degree of plasticity in a brain region reflects how much its data change (or are likely to change) in the outside world.
- motor and somatosensory areas involved in navigating the body remain more plastic, because body plans change throughout a lifetime: you get fat, thin, put on boots or slippers or crutches, hop on a bike or a scooter or a trampoline.
- While the statistics of sound don’t change much, your body’s feedback from the world constantly does. As a result, the primary auditory cortex tightens down; less so for the body plan.
- Plasticity declines with age, but across the brain it declines differently, steeply or shallowly, depending on its function.
- Roughly speaking, the variability of a genetic sequence mirrors the variability of features in the world.
- sometimes an idea, like a small fairy or a sprite, passes by and you say, “Ah, I don’t know what that is, but it can’t be very important.” Well, sometimes it is.
- But happily, although brain plasticity diminishes over the years, it is still present. Livewiring is not solely the privilege of the young.
- In fact, a stunning one-third of the nuns seem to have had the molecular pathology of Alzheimer’s without the expected cognitive symptoms. An active mental life, even in the very elderly, fosters new connections.
- So learning can happen at any age. But why is it slower as a brain matures? One reason is that many of the swinging doors have closed.
- brain changes are driven by the difference between the internal model and what happens in the world. Thus, brains shift only when something is unpredicted. As you age and figure out the rules of the world—from the expectations of your home life to behavior in your social circles to the foods you prefer—your brain becomes less challenged with novel stimulation, and therefore more settled into place.
- the brain’s solidification reflects its success in understanding the world. Neural networks lock themselves more deeply into place not because of fading function, but instead because they have had success in figuring things out.
- Although having a sponge-like brain that absorbs everything sounds appealing, the game of life is largely about figuring out the rules. What we lose in modifiability we gain in expertise.
- If plasticity didn’t decline, you would not lock down the conventions of the world.
- Preserving total flexibility would retain the helplessness of an infant.
- 10 REMEMBER WHEN
- older memories are more stable than newer memories.1 This is known today as Ribot’s law,
- there is no such thing as a dedicated memory structure in the brain.
- Instead of a highway, the nervous system was more like a patchwork of local road projects that communicated with one another. He called his framework the “neuron doctrine,”
- If brain cells are separate, how do they communicate with each other? And the answer was quickly determined: they are connected at the specialized points we now call synapses.
- Ramón y Cajal suggested that learning and memory might occur by changes in the strengths of the synaptic connections.
- After stimulating input nerve fibers in an area called the hippocampus, they found an increased electrical response from the receiving (postsynaptic) cell. And that larger signal lasted for up to ten hours. They called this long-term potentiation,
- If a connection can potentiate, it also needs the ability to depress.
- it was shown that various manipulations (for example, A fires with no response from B) can lead to long-term depression; that is, the strength between two cells is weakened.
- By tuning its parameters just right, a network can make links between things that occurred at the same time.
- Think of your best friend and your best friend’s house. The sight of your pal triggers a particular constellation of neurons, and the house triggers another. Because the two groups of neurons are active at the same time when you go over there, the two concepts become associated; hence this is called associative learning. When either of these notions become triggered, it sparks the other to life. And even better, either one can activate all sorts of other associations, such as memories of your shared conversations, meals, and laughter.
- in the early 1980s, the physicist John Hopfield tried to understand whether a very simplified artificial neural network could store a small collection of “memories.”6 He found that if he exposed a network to some patterns (such as letters of the alphabet) and strengthened the synapses between neurons that fired simultaneously, then the network would remember the patterns. Each letter (say, E) triggered a particular constellation of neurons, and these neurons strengthened their connections with one another. The letter S, in contrast, would be represented by a different pattern. Now Hopfield could present a corrupted version of one of the patterns (such as an E with part of the top cut off), and the cascade of activity running through the network would evolve toward the pattern for the full E. In other words, the network completed the pattern to match its notion of what an E should look like, given all of its previous experiences.
- THE ENEMY OF MEMORY IS NOT TIME; IT’S OTHER MEMORIES
- The first problem facing brains is that they live long lives.
- lifelong learning must continually balance between the two horns of the bull: protect old data while taking on new.
- the stability/plasticity dilemma: How does the brain retain what it’s learned while simultaneously taking on the new?
- While artificial neural networks suffer from the memory mud problem, real brains don’t.
- The fact that brains circumvent this dilemma, somehow locking down older memories, tells us that simply strengthening and weakening synapses in a network isn’t the full picture. Something more is happening.
- The first solution to the stability/plasticity dilemma is to make sure the whole system isn’t changing at once.
- neuromodulators can carefully control the plasticity of synapses—and in this way, learning can take place only at the appropriate places and times, instead of each time activity passes through the network.10 This specificity slows the descent of a network into memory mud, because it changes synaptic strengths only when something important is happening:
- Experiences turn into memories when they are germane to the life of the organism, and especially when connected to a high emotional state such as fear or pleasure.
- the brain implements a second solution. It doesn’t always hold memories in one place. Instead, it passes what it has learned to another area for more permanent storage.
- Some of what we know about memory is distilled from data in the hippocampus and its surrounding regions, a central site of memory formation.
- The role of the hippocampus in learning is temporary. It’s not the site of permanent storage:
- The formation of new memories requires the hippocampus, but the memories are not stored permanently there. Instead, it passes along the learning to parts of the cortex, which hold the memory more permanently.
- the hippocampus is necessary to consolidate memory: it needs to replay the patterns to the cortex over and over.
- However, if you keep performing the task, activity can eventually be detected in other areas (your prefrontal cortex). Those neurons are changing at a slower pace, suggesting that the first region is teaching the second what it has learned.
- synaptic strengthening and weakening is not the only, or even the most important, mechanism involved in memory.
- Perhaps changes in synaptic strength are simply the way intertwined cells carefully balance excitation against inhibition to keep themselves away from epilepsy (over-excitement) or shutdown (over-inhibition), and thus the synaptic changes are consequences of memory storage rather than the root mechanism.
- we have plenty of good reasons to think that synapses are not the only things changing.
- The cortical changes are more than the modification of synapses, but instead appear to involve the addition of new cellular material.
- if memories were simply retained in the fabric of synaptic weights, we’d have no reason to expect neurogenesis: the growth and insertion of new neurons.
- if you train a rat on a learning task that requires the hippocampus, the number of new adult-generated neurons doubles from baseline. In contrast, if you train rats on a learning task that doesn’t require the hippocampus, the number of new cells goes unaltered.
- alterations to the sugars and proteins around the DNA alter patterns of gene expression.
- world experience modifies which genes get squelched and which magnified.
- In this manner, your experiences with the world get under your skin—all the way to the level of your gene expression, where they can be embedded on a long timescale.
- plasticity exists throughout the brain at every level.
- Although it’s not always noticed, all scales interact with one another. The faster layers instruct the slow layers with accrued innovations. The slower layers provide checks and structure to the fast layers.
- The principle of pace layering is useful for thinking about the brain. Instead of ranging from fashion to governance to nature, the brain’s pace layers range from fast biochemical cascades to changes in gene expression.
- the fast cascades kick off slower cascades, which can eventually tip over more sluggish processes, which can set into motion gradual, deep changes.
- In the end, exceptionally useful programs get burned down all the way to the level of the DNA. Consider instincts—the inborn behaviors we don’t have to learn.26 These come about via plasticity on a longer timescale: the Darwinian plasticity of species.
- Instead of encoding pixels or transcripts, we encode new stimuli with respect to other things we have learned, including concepts both physical and social.
- Recall that in the pace layers model, slow layers provide a framework for the fast layers. As a result, early experience becomes foundational. It develops into the architecture upon which everything subsequent is built. Everything new is understood through the filter of the old.
- memory is a function of everything that has come before it.
- Each person grasps the task differently, making it impossible to have a standard set of instructions that is uploadable to any brain.
- unlike a computer, the “instructions” for flying the machine aren’t a file; they are instead tied to everything that has come before in your life. Earlier experiences build an internal city of memory, into which each new resident must find his unique fit.
- Synesthesia, like hyperthymesia, reflects a stickiness in pace layering: the fast layers push their agendas more quickly than normal into the deeper layers.
- On the broadest level, there is short-term memory (remembering a phone number just long enough to dial it) and long-term memory (what you did on that vacation two years ago). Within long-term memory, we can distinguish declarative memories (such as names and facts) from non-declarative memories (how to ride a bicycle, something you can do but not articulate how). Within the non-declarative category are several subtypes, such as remembering how to type rapidly or why you salivate when hearing someone open a candy wrapper.
- the brain has to have different systems with different speeds of learning: one for the extraction of generalities in the environment (slow learning), and one for episodic memory (fast learning). One proposal is that these two systems are the hippocampus and the cortex: the hippocampus is fast in its changes (so it learns from examples rapidly), while the cortex takes its time to slowly extract generalities. The first changes quickly, retaining particulars, while the second changes slowly, requiring many examples.
- 11 THE WOLF AND THE MARS ROVER
- The problem is that we’re still building robots with hardwiring. If a current robot loses a wheel, an axle, or part of its motherboard, the game is over. But across the animal kingdom, organisms damage themselves and keep going. They limp, they drag, they hop, they favor a weakness, they do whatever it takes to keep moving in the direction of their goals.
- This difference between the rover and the wolf lies in information versus information-with-a-purpose.
- Mother Nature knows there is no point in hardwiring a wolf brain. Body plans change. Environments change. The complex relationship among capabilities and actions changes.
- After all, everything is in flux: bodies, food sources, and the mapping between inputs, capabilities, and outputs. Instead of predefined circuitry, a better approach is to build a system that actively improves, self-adjusting to reach its goals.
- Each time your brain interacts with the world, it sends a clear message to the different senses: synchronize your watches.
- Because of livewiring, we are each a vessel of space and time. We drop into a particular spot on the world and vacuum in the details of that spot. We become, in essence, a recording device for our moment in the world.
- When you meet an older person and feel shocked by the opinions or worldview she holds, you can try to empathize with her as a recording device for her window of time and her set of experiences. Someday your brain will be that time-ossified snapshot that frustrates the next generation.
- We generally go through life thinking there’s me and there’s the world. But as we’ve seen in this book, who you are emerges from everything you’ve interacted with: your environment, all of your experiences, your friends, your enemies, your culture, your belief system, your era—all of it. Although we value statements such as “he’s his own man” or “she’s an independent thinker,” there is in fact no way to separate yourself from the rich context in which you’re embedded. There is no you without the external. Your beliefs and dogmas and aspirations are shaped by it, inside and out, like a sculpture from a block of marble. Thanks to livewiring, each of us is the world.
