# The Multi-Orgasmic Man: Sexual Secrets Every Man Should Know

- Pulling the testicles down away from the body, which we describe below, is one age-old technique for postponing ejaculation.
- To learn to become multi-orgasmic, you will need to become increasingly aware of the speed at which you get aroused.
- The Taoists, however, noticed that there are actually four stages of erection—four attainments, as they called them. The first is firmness (also referred to as lengthening). The second is swelling. The third is hardness. The fourth is heat.
- WHERE DOES THE SEMEN GO WHEN I DON’T EJACULATE? The semen is broken down and reabsorbed by the body, just as the sperm are reabsorbed in a man who has had a vasectomy.
- HOW CAN I EXPERIENCE MULTIPLE ORGASMS?
- The contractile phase is a crucial fork in the road,
- During the contractile phase, you will feel a series of prostate contractions lasting three to five seconds. These pleasurable pelvic orgasms are what we have been calling contractile-phase orgasms. Though the intensity of these orgasms varies and they can often be as intense as regular ejaculatory orgasms, at first they may be quite mild. Now is the moment of truth. Instead of continuing to the point of no return, past which you must ejaculate, you will stop or otherwise decrease your stimulation momentarily—long enough for you to gain control of your arousal rate.
- You can also squeeze your pc muscle around your fluttering prostate, which will help you maintain some control over these spasms.
- Most men find that they must stop their arousal just before reaching contractile-phase orgasm and let themselves relax into it.
- Many multi-orgasmic men describe themselves as mentally falling backward into nonejaculatory orgasms instead of falling forward into ejaculation.
- the first step in controlling your arousal rate, and therefore your ejaculation, is deep and slow breathing.
- When practicing any of the exercises in this book, always inhale through your nose, which filters and warms the air.
- EXERCISE 1 BELLY BREATHING
- 1.  Sit on a Chair with your back straight and your feet touching the floor about shoulder width apart. 2.  Place your hands over your navel and relax your shoulders. 3.  Inhale through your nose and feel your lower abdomen expand at the navel area (below and around it) so that it bulges outward. Your diaphragm will also descend (see figure 5). 4.  Keeping your chest relaxed, exhale with some force to pull the lower abdomen back in, as if you were pulling your navel back toward your spine. Also feel your penis and testicles pull up. 5.  Repeat steps 3 and 4 eighteen to thirty-six times.
- Belly breathing also massages the organs and prostate and can relieve the full feeling many men experience when they first stop ejaculating.
- Although it is not as important to exhale through your nose as it is to inhale, it is still preferable.
- EXERCISE 2 CENTURY COUNT
- 1.  Slowly inhale (expanding your belly) and exhale (flattening your belly). Count each complete inhalation and exhalation as one breath. 2.  Continue breathing from the belly and counting from one to one hundred, thinking only about your breathing. 3.  If you notice that your mind has strayed, start again. 4.  Practice this exercise twice a day until you can count to one hundred with ease.
- EXERCISE 3 STOPPING THE STREAM
- 1.  When you are about to urinate, stand on your toes and the balls of your feet. If necessary, you can use the wall for support. 2.  Inhale deeply. 3.  Exhale slowly, forcefully push out the urine while pulling up on your perineum and clenching your teeth. 4.  Inhale and contract your pc muscle to stop the flow of urine midstream. 5.  Exhale and start urinating again. 6.  Repeat steps 4 and 5 three to six times or until you have finished urinating.
- Because the bladder and the prostate are so close, you should also urinate before self-pleasuring or lovemaking whenever your bladder feels full. A full bladder will make you feel like you need to ejaculate and can actually make it more difficult for you to stop yourself from ejaculating.
- If you have a strong pc muscle, you should be able to stop the flow of urine midstream and then start it again. If this is difficult for you, your pc muscle is weak.
- Stopping the flow of urine may sting at first. This is perfectly normal and should stop within a few weeks, unless for some reason you have an infection, in which case you should wait until you have seen a doctor and cleared it up before continuing with the practice.
- EXERCISE 4 PC PULL-UPS 1.  Inhale and concentrate on your prostate, perineum, and anus. 2.  As you exhale, contract your pc muscle around your prostate and around your anus while at the same time contracting the muscles around your eyes and mouth. 3.  Inhale and relax, releasing your pc, eye, and mouth muscles. 4.  Repeat steps 2 and 3, contracting your muscles as you exhale and releasing them as you inhale, nine to thirty-six times.
- try raising and lowering a towel,
- It is quite possible that most men ejaculate so quickly because they grew up trying to “get off” before they “got caught.”
- Rubbing your testicles actually increases the production of testosterone,
- explore your perineum and the Million-Dollar Point (just in front of your anus). Pushing on this spot when you are about to ejaculate can help stop the ejaculatory reflex,
- The Million-Dollar Point is best stimulated after you have an erection and are highly aroused,
- It is important to take as much time as you have to enjoy and learn to prolong ejaculation.
- “we’ve found that if a man can learn to go for fifteen to twenty minutes during masturbation or pleasuring, he can go as long as he wants to during intercourse. That period (fifteen to twenty minutes) seems to be critical. Once you’ve passed it, you have control. It’s that simple.”
- “It’s somewhere between masturbation and meditation.”
- If you are able to experience the involuntary pc contractions that occur at contractile-phase orgasm without ejaculating, you have already taken the right road to becoming a multi-orgasmic man.
- These will not be earth-shattering orgasms at first, but eventually they will spread throughout your body.
- EXERCISE 5 SELF-PLEASURING 1.  Start by lubricating your penis. Lubricant will increase your sensations. Oil is generally better than lotion, which dries up more quickly. 2.  Pleasure yourself however you like, remembering to massage and stimulate your entire penis, your scrotum, and your perineum, including the Million-Dollar Point. 3.  Try to notice your increasing levels of arousal: notice the tingling at the root of your penis, notice the stages of erection, notice your heartbeat rise. 4.  When you are getting near ejaculation, stop and rest. Try to notice the contraction of your pc muscle and anus that occurs at contractile-phase orgasm, although don’t be surprised if it takes some time to experience this without ejaculating. You can also try to squeeze your pc muscle around your prostate if the prostate starts contracting and you are afraid you might fall over the edge. 5.  After you regain control, you can start again as many times as you like and continue for as long as you like.
- you need to stay aware of your arousal rate and stop a few strokes (or thrusts, if you’re with your partner) before you think you will ejaculate.
- The deep breathing we described earlier is extremely important in controlling your arousal rate and in delaying ejaculation when you are highly aroused. One technique that has proved especially effective is to breathe in deeply and hold your breath for several moments until the urge to ejaculate subsides.
- Some multi-orgasmic men, however, breathe rapidly to delay ejaculation. (This quick, shallow breathing is called the breath of fire in the yoga tradition.)
- Deep, slow breathing helps control your sexual energy, whereas shallow, rapid breathing helps disperse the energy. You can experiment and see what works for you.
- One of the oldest Taoist techniques is pressing the Million-Dollar Point while contracting your pc muscle. This helps delay ejaculation both by focusing your attention and by interrupting the ejaculatory reflex.
- More than any mechanical technique, the secret to stopping yourself from ejaculating is learning to pump your sexual energy away from your genitals and up through your spine to the rest of your body.
- EXERCISE 6 SEPARATING ORGASM FROM EJACULATION 1.  Start by lubricating your penis, as you did in the Self-Pleasuring exercise. 2.  Before focusing on your genitals, remember to touch and massage the rest of your body, especially your belly, thighs, and nipples. 3.  Self-pleasure however you like, remembering to stimulate your entire penis, your scrotum, and your perineum. 4.  Pay close attention to your arousal rate. Once again, try to notice your increasing levels of arousal: notice the tingling at the root of your penis, notice the stages of erection, notice your breathing change and your heartbeat rise. 5.  As you feel yourself getting close to the point of no return, stop, breathe, and lightly contract your pc muscle around your prostate. In addition, you also can delay your ejaculation by pressing on the Million-Dollar Point, by using the scrotal tug, by pressing on the tip of your penis, or simply by using your mind to squeeze the tip of your penis. You can experiment and see which of these techniques works best for you. Most important of all, however, is paying close attention to your arousal and stopping in time—at least a few strokes before the point of no return. 6.  If you feel that your sexual energy is getting too wild and difficult to control, try to draw this energy up your spine with your mind, and squeeze and release your pc muscle several times. If you are still feeling too hot and out of control, stop for ten or twenty seconds and focus on deep breathing. 7.  Try to notice the contraction of your pc muscle and anus that occurs at contractile-phase orgasm. 8.  After you have peaked several times without ejaculating, stop. You will feel peaceful and/or energized afterward. Try to notice your sexual energy circulating in your body, which you will feel as a tingling, itching, or prickling.
- the most important parts of the practice are breathing, squeezing your pc muscle, and learning to relax into a nonejaculatory orgasm.
- EXERCISE 7 THE COOL DRAW 1.  Touch or cup your testicles with one hand to warm them up until you feel a slight tingling or the first stirring of your sexual energy. (If you are in a public place, you can simply think a sexual thought or fantasy.) 2.  Inhale and gently pull up on the muscles around the testicles, the perineum, and the anus. As you inhale and pull your muscles up, imagine that you are sipping this sexual energy and drawing it from your testicles to your perineum and on to your anus and tailbone. 3.  Exhale and relax your muscles, but keep your attention on your rising sexual energy. 4.  Continue to inhale and pull up and then exhale and relax several more times until you can feel a warm or tingling sensation at your perineum. Once you are able to move this sexual energy, you can simply begin using the spine like a straw, sipping the energy from your testicles and perineum right up the entire length of your spine to the base of your skull. (Gently tucking your chin in will help the energy move from your spine into your head.) Do this for five to ten minutes or until you become aware of a light or tingling feeling in your head. With your mind, try to circle the energy in your head. 5.  Finally, touch your tongue to the roof of your mouth half an inch behind your front teeth where the palate curves down (see figure 11). Your tongue works like a light switch that connects your front and back channels, allowing the energy to flow down the front of your body to your navel.
- You also may find that you feel the energy at certain points along your spine but not at others. As long as you feel the energy reach your brain, you will know that you have successfully performed the exercise.
- In addition to drawing sexual energy from the genitals up to the brain along the Back Channel, it is also essential for you to bring the energy down along the Front Channel to your belly, where it can be safely stored.
- if you cannot feel enough sexual energy by simply touching your testicles or thinking a sexual thought, you can stimulate your genitals more directly.
- EXERCISE 8 THE BIG DRAW 1.  Stand and pleasure yourself until you have a strong erection but well before you reach the point of no return (thirty seconds to a minute before you would otherwise ejaculate). 2.  Stop stimulating yourself and rest for a moment to regain control. Then simultaneously contract your pc muscle firmly around your prostate gland and clamp your toes down on the floor. 3.  Inhale and draw your sexual energy away from the perineum toward your anus and spine by squeezing your buttocks tightly. 4.  As if you were pumping the brakes on a car, contract in waves the muscles from your anus up your spine, each time taking a short inhalation. Rocking your spine back and forth as if you were riding a horse will also help the energy to move up the spine. 5.  As the energy reaches the base of your skull, make sure your chin is tucked in gently to help the energy move from the spine into your head. 6.  Roll your eyes up as if you were looking at the top of your head, which will help bring the energy all the way up to the crown of your head. 7.  When you have pumped the energy up to the crown of your head, you have done one Big Draw. The state of your erection is a measure of how successfully you have been doing the Big Draw: as you draw the energy out of your genitals and up your spine, your erection should decrease. 8.  Repeat steps 3 through 6 eight more times. 9.  After you have pumped the energy up to the crown of your head nine times, use your mind, your eyes, and all your senses to spiral this creative sexual energy in your brain nine, eighteen, or thirty-six times, first in one direction, and then the other. When you have finished spiraling, rest for a while and experience the sensational feeling of energy in your brain, often felt as warmth and tingling, like a mini-orgasm. 10.  When you feel that your brain is full, touch your tongue to your palate and let the energy flow down the Front Channel from your brain first to between your eyebrows, then to your nose, throat, heart, and solar plexus, and finally to your navel, where it can be stored.
- EXERCISE 9 VENTING 1.  Lie down on your back. Elevate your knees with a pillow if you feel any pain in the small of your back or lumbar area. 2.  Place your hands in front of your mouth so that the tips of your fingers touch and so that your palms are facing toward your feet. 3.  Close your eyes and take a deep breath. Feel your stomach and chest expand gently. 4.  Smile and exhale quietly, making the sound heeeeee. As you are exhaling, push your hands toward your feet and imagine that your body is a hollow tube that you are emptying with your hands. 5.  Repeat this sound and movement three, six, or nine times, each time imagining that you are pushing this excess energy from your head, past your heart and belly, through your legs, and out your feet. You can also try the exercise while standing or sitting. If you are still having a problem venting your energy, contact a Healing Tao instructor (see the appendix) or an acupuncturist.
- If you get too close to the point of no return, you should try continuously contracting your pc muscle so as to firmly grasp your prostate and stop yourself from ejaculating. You can keep your pc muscle clenched while you are pumping your buttock muscles. If you are close to ejaculation and need additional force to redirect the energy up, at the same time that you squeeze your buttocks, also tighten your hands into fists and clench your jaw muscles and teeth. This will increase the pressure of your pumping action. However, this last technique should be avoided by men who store tension in their neck and jaw.
- EXERCISE 10 THE FINGER LOCK 1.  When you feel that ejaculation is inevitable, press the three middle fingers (in other words, not your pinkie or thumb) of your dominant hand into the Million-Dollar Point just hard enough to stop the flow of semen. 2.  Your fingers should be curved slightly and your middle finger should push directly against the urethral tube. This tube expands when you near ejaculation, so it should be easy to find. Your other two fingers should press on each side of the tube to hold it in place. 3.  Contract your pc muscle, which encircles the prostate, and pull up your perineum. Draw the orgasmic energy up to the spine and to your brain. 4.  Hold your fingers in place before, during, and after the contractions. 5.  When the pumping has stopped completely, remove your fingers.
- EXERCISE 11 PELVIC MASSAGE 1.  Using your fingers, massage your Million-Dollar Point in a circle, first in one direction and then the other. 2.  Repeat this massage between your anus and tailbone. 3.  Repeat this massage at each of the eight holes of the sacrum. If you can’t find the individual holes, massage the general area in several different places, circling first in one direction and then the other.
- The Taoists developed numerous different thrusting patterns, most of which involved varying between shallow thrusts and deep thrusts (see figure 20). All of these patterns encouraged the man to thrust shallowly a number of times before thrusting deeply, the most common involving nine shallow and one deep. (As you learn to control your ejaculation, you can lessen the ratio to six or even three shallow to one deep.)
- EXERCISE 12 THE BIG DRAW DURING LOVEMAKING EMBRACE When you are both highly aroused, stop and hold each other. Look deeply into each other’s eyes. Truly see your partner’s inner goodness, and express the depth of your love for her with your eyes. Keeping your eyes open also helps bring the energy up. Send each other energy through your gaze, your lips, the palms of your hands, and the surface of your skin. THRUST/SCREW When your partner is highly aroused, use the head of your penis to rub her inner vaginal lips and especially her clitoris. When she is ready, you will be able to tell by her swollen lips and clitoris and the abundance of her vaginal juices. Enter your partner slowly. You may want to start with a pattern of nine shallow thrusts and one deep thrust. (Remember, these are general guidelines, not rules.) CONTRACT While still inside your partner, lightly contract the head and base of your penis and your PC muscle. You will be using your mind as-well as your pelvic muscles to squeeze these “round” muscles. If necessary, use your fingers to squeeze the base of your penis. PAUSE When you feel you are near orgasm, pull back so that only about an inch or two of your penis (the head, mostly) is inside your partner’s vagina. Make sure you communicate to your partner that you are close to the edge and that she needs to avoid pushing you over the edge. (Pull out all the way only if absolutely necessary.) DRAW Squeeze your anus and use your mind to draw the energy up from the tip of your penis, through your perineum and tailbone, and up your spine to your head (see the Cool Draw and the Big Draw in chapter 3). This will help spread the orgasmic energy from your genitals, decreasing the urge to ejaculate while expanding your orgasm from a genital orgasm to a whole-body orgasm. RELAX Relaxing allows the blood vessels in your penis to dilate and allows you to exchange more of your sexual energy with your partner. Your erection may decrease somewhat, which will let the hormone-filled blood return to fortify the rest of your body and allow new blood to flow into your penis when you get hard again. Continue holding each other, kissing, and circulating energy. When ready, you can continue thrusting/screwing and repeat the Big Draw until both of you are completely satisfied.
- EXERCISE 13 SOUL-MATING (Exchanging Sexual Energy) EXPANDING The pleasuring and thrusting and screwing techniques described earlier in this chapter will expand your and your partner’s sexual energy to a point where it is ready to circulate. The more lubricated a woman is, the more yin energy she has. As we alluded to before, you can even drink her yin directly through oral sex or from the nipples of her breasts. It will help if you (and, ideally, your partner) have drawn the energy up and are circulating it through your own bodies (that is, through your Microcosmic Orbits). EMBRACING Embrace your partner in a face-to-face position with most of your bodies in contact. If the woman is significantly lighter or weaker, she should be on top. Otherwise, it doesn’t matter which person is on top. Remember to look deeply into each other’s eyes: eye contact, as mentioned above, is extremely important. Send each other love and energy through your gaze. BREATHING Coordinating your breathing is essential for exchanging chi. Now that you have stopped thrusting or screwing and are holding your partner close, place your nose next to your partner’s ear and your ear next to your partner’s nose. This will help you hear one another’s breathing. Then synchronize your breathing: you can both inhale and exhale simultaneously, or one of you can inhale while the other exhales. Keep your thoughts focused on one another and be conscious of your chests rising and falling in rhythm with one another. CIRCULATING To harmonize, both you and your partner must be able to circulate energy through your own Microcosmic Orbit as the first step toward balancing the Back Channel, which runs up your spine and is more yang, and the Front Channel, which runs down the front midline of your body and is more yin. Remember to draw energy up by contracting your anus and/or using your mind, and then to guide energy down the front of your body through your tongue. EXCHANGING 1.  After you have been breathing with one another for a while, you should each draw your energy from your genitals up to the crown of your head. 2.  Then, while you are both inhaling, you should envision drawing her cool yin energy in from her vagina to your penis. (She should envision drawing your hot yang energy from your penis into her vagina.) 3.  You should both continue drawing this energy back to your perineum and then up to your tailbone and finally up your spine to the crown of your head. 4.  Then exhale and let the energy descend from the crown of your head through the midline between your eyebrows down your face and through your tongue—which, if your tongue is touching your partner’s, will allow you to exchange energy through your mouths. From your tongue, the energy should be brought down the rest of your Front Channel to your navel. (You can also exchange energy from your heart through your chest to her breasts and from there down her Front Channel. She can do the same for you.) 5.  Continue breathing and…
- LEARNING CONTROL
- First, you should have your partner stimulate you manually while you focus on the sensations in your genitals and on stopping as you get close to ejaculating.
- Once you feel confident of your ability to detect and postpone your ejaculation, you can try intercourse with the woman on top,
- finally you can try slowing down instead of stopping.
