# The Circadian Code: Lose Weight, Supercharge Your Energy, and Transform Your Health from Morning to Midnight: Longevity Book

- Good habits beget more good habits.
- there are seven criteria for learning.
- Attention
- Working Memory
- Positive Reward Assessment/Negative Reward Assessment
- Hippocampal Memory
- Alertness
- Mood
- Autonomic Function
- You need at least 1 hour of daylight exposure—being outside, driving in your car, sitting by a window where you can soak up at least 1,000 lux of light—to reduce sleepiness, synchronize your clock, perk up your mood, and stay happy and productive throughout the day.
- you have to work later into the evening, hack your light. You’ll be most productive if you can switch to task lighting that lights up only your work area and reduces direct exposure to your eyes, as compared with overhead or horizontal lighting.
- But more important, don’t let your work disrupt your sleep schedule. There’s no way you can be productive and tired at the same time.
- Studies have shown that both modest fasting and exercise have a similar brain-boosting effect. Each of them can increase a chemical called brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF) that improves the connection between brain cells and improves brain function.
- Lack of Sleep Disrupts the Circadian Code for Learning
- One study conducted with well-controlled conditions23 showed that if you take a person who sleeps for 8 hours and give them the same math lesson every day for a week, by the end of the week this person will have mastered that particular lesson, going from scoring 10 on a scale of 1 to 100 to scoring 100. But if the person sleeps only 4 hours, they go from 10 to 50.
- According to the American Heart Association (AHA), anyone healthy enough to exercise needs at least 150 minutes per week of moderate exercise, or 75 minutes per week of vigorous exercise (or a combination of both). That breaks down to moderate exercise for 30 minutes a day, 5 times a week.
- Studies show that after exercise, the cells inside our muscles produce several molecules. One of them is interleukin-15 (IL-15), which was already known to increase bone mass. Interestingly, we now know that IL-15 also has some benefits on sleep. In one study, rabbits injected with a small amount of IL-15 were found to have better and deeper sleep.5 A second mechanism occurs when muscle cells produce another molecule, irisin. Many obese people have less muscle mass and produce less irisin. Reduced amounts of irisin correlate with obstructive sleep apnea.
- Mice that lack a circadian clock everywhere in their body and brain have fragmented sleep. But researchers have developed a new genetic method that can turn on specific circadian clocks, like the ones in their muscles. When this happens, these mice sleep like mice that have a clock in their brain.
- Our physical strength is largely determined by the overall mass and health of our cartilage, bones, and muscles. Each of these key pillars of physical strength has its own circadian clock, which sets a rhythm for repair and rebuilding of these tissues.
- Having a better clock appears to increase slow-twitch muscles.
- If you don’t have an uninterrupted 30- to 45-minute block in which to exercise every day, you will experience all the same benefits if you divide your time into two or three segments of 10 to 15 minutes per day. This actually works perfectly for enhancing your circadian code, because exercising during both early morning and late afternoon can boost circadian rhythm.
- If you have fasted for 10 to 12 hours before your morning walk, run, or bike ride, you will likely tap into your stored body fat for energy during your exercise. If you start your morning activity before breaking your overnight fast, your muscles will spend more energy, using even more fat as the energy source, literally melting away even more body fat.
- Early morning is a great time to get outside and start moving with an aerobic activity.
- Also, exercise stimulates new brain cell production14 and your ability to make new neuronal connections for deeper learning and more memory. We also know that exercise helps repair damaged brain cells by improving the neurons’ ability to repair their own DNA.
- It doesn’t matter whether you wait until sunrise to start your morning walk, run, swim, or cycle. You can start anywhere from 30 minutes to 2 hours before or after sunrise.
- Another great time for physical activity is at dusk or in the late afternoon,19 starting from 3:00 p.m. to dinnertime. This is when muscle tone begins to rise, so it’s the best time for strength training, including weight lifting, or vigorous exercise like intense indoor cycling. High-intensity athletes and those trying to optimize their physical fitness will find that exercising before dinner followed by a protein-rich meal will help them repair muscle, build muscle mass, and promote recovery.
- Blood flow and blood pressure are also high in the afternoon, which might improve better oxygenation of muscles.
- If you are aiming to get maximum benefit from exercise with minimum injury, afternoon is the best time to exercise. There are numerous studies showing motor coordination and strength peaks around late afternoon. This is further supported by observation from analysis of 25 seasons of Monday Night Football games, dating from 1970 to 1994.21
- Exercise is known to reduce appetite,22 so afternoon exercise not only helps burn some calories, it can also help reduce hunger at dinnertime, so you may eat less. Exercise also helps our muscles take up more glucose in a mechanism that does not depend on insulin.23 As insulin production and release gradually decline through the evening, insulin alone may not be sufficient to prevent our blood glucose levels from shooting up beyond the healthy range.
- Physical activity increases demand for glucose, and muscles can soak up a good amount of blood glucose, thereby reducing the blood glucose spike after an evening meal so that you will be in a normal physiological range.
- Late-night exercise in a gym or on a treadmill can increase cortisol to morning levels and delay the nightly rise of melatonin. Intense exercise also raises body temperature and heart rate. All of these factors interfere with your ability to go to sleep.
- If late night is the only time you can exercise, taking a shower before bedtime can help your body cool down, which will help you get to sleep.
- Just like exercise improves sleep and circadian rhythm, having good sleep and circadian rhythm also has rewards on exercise performance.
- Everyone should focus more on when they eat, instead of what they eat.
- When mice ate for only 12 hours, we never saw a reduction in muscle mass. In fact, only fat mass was reduced. If the mice ate a healthy diet within 8 to 10 hours, they gradually increased their muscle mass, and after 36 weeks, they had 10 to 15 percent more muscle mass than mice that ate whenever they wanted.
- In our lab, we found that muscle repair and rejuvenation genes in the mice got a double boost from having a healthy circadian clock and also having a clear feeding-fasting cycle.
- A systematic study of resistance-trained athletes on an 8-hour TRE also showed some benefits.28 Remember, these were resistance-trained athletes with excellent physique and body composition to begin with. They were already paying extreme attention to every ounce of fat and muscle mass they have. So, researchers were not expecting too much additional benefit from adopting a 10-week TRE. These athletes did not see a decline in muscle mass, but surprisingly, their fat mass significantly reduced, and many markers of good health also improved.
- In my lab, we put mice in a rotating drum, where they have to balance themselves. We found that if they eat for 8 to 10 hours, they can stay on the drum 20 percent longer.
- While shift work was the primary disrupter of circadian rhythm only a few years ago, today, connectivity is the culprit.
- The ganglion cells from the eyes that transmit all light information from the eye to the brain actually branch out or are dedicated to connecting to numerous brain regions to regulate how light affects vision, behavior, sleep, alertness, depression, seizure, migraine, etc.
- What is surprising is that although melanopsin is present in only a small subset of 2 to 4 percent of all ganglion cells, when these melanopsin cells are less active or more active, they also affect how the rest of the 96 to 98 percent of cells wire to their respective brain targets.
- Even dim light can interfere with your circadian rhythm. A mere 8 lux—a level of brightness exceeded by most table lamps and about twice that of a night-light—has an effect, notes Steven Lockley, a sleep researcher at Harvard.
- The blue wavelengths—which are beneficial during daylight hours because they boost attention, reaction times, and mood—seem to be the most disruptive at night. Exposure to them reduces melatonin production and suppresses sleep. For children and teens, screens filled with blue light pose a particular problem. A 2016 study on 600 children showed that children who have increased screen time are more likely to have poor sleep quality and problem behaviors.
- For example, Drift TV is a small box that connects to your television through an HDMI input and removes a percentage of blue light from the screen.
- day. In other words, we can re-create seminatural lighting by increasing blue light during the day and amber-colored light at night, simulating a natural day-night cycle.
- For now, home owners can install dimmer switches on their current LED lights.
- If you wake up frequently at night to use the bathroom, you can install motion-activated path lighting that shines directly on the floor.
- Or you can change your light bulbs to amber-colored lights that throw off a bit of orange color.
- You can also adjust the type of lighting you use in the evening. For reading, or for doing homework, you may need a little bit more light than what is provided by your dimmed overhead lighting. Instead of flooding the room with light, focus on task lighting from table lamps.
- Red lights have the least amount of blue and work well for night-lights.
- We have known for more than 30 years that blue-light-filtering glasses relieve chronic migraine pain.
- In an interesting study, yet to be replicated in additional hospitals, just covering the cribs in the NICU with a blanket for a few hours to create a sense of night substantially improved the health of these very fragile babies, who were then released from the NICU to normal care much faster than those who stayed under the standard care in constant light.
- Sunglasses can reduce bright light reaching the eye by seven- to fifteenfold. That means if daylight inside a car is around 5,000 lux, sunglasses cut the exposure down to between 330 and 700 lux.
- For some people, the same food elicited a sharper rise in blood glucose, while others eating the identical food at the same time had a shallower rise.
- Almost every aspect of eating, from craving food or feeling hungry to digestion and elimination, occurs according to strong circadian timing. What’s more, we also know that eating the wrong foods at the wrong time not only disrupts the digestive clock but creates disease and chronic illness.
- The digestive process is divided into stages, and each stage has a circadian component.
- The first stage, the cephalic phase, occurs in the mouth. Like Pavlov’s dogs, when we see food, think about food, or are accustomed to eating at a certain time, our mouth begins to produce saliva that is rich in enzymes, making it easier for the stomach to do its job.
- Saliva secretion is circadian: It is most productive during the day, up to 10 times greater than it is when we sleep.
- Once food is properly chewed and swallowed, it travels down the esophagus and passes into the stomach, beginning the gastric phase of digestion.
- The stomach lining is covered with a cushion of mucuslike material that ensures it does not get damaged when food particles pass through it. This lining is filled with cells that are arranged like a cobblestone street. When any one of those cells gets damaged, the lining becomes compromised, opening the possibility of gut content leaking into the body. Both mechanical and chemical actions during the digestion process damage these cells, and the lining gets repaired between meals.
- In fact, there is so much damage to our gut lining that 10 to 14 percent of cells are replaced every day. This repair and replenishment process is circadian.
- Every time we sleep, growth hormone secreted from the brain acts on the gut lining to repair itself, instructing the gut lining to check for damaged cells and replace leaky patches with new cells.
- Stomach acid production and secretion happens every time we eat, and there is a circadian component to that as well. Stomach acid production is typically high during the hours before bedtime, roughly 8:00 to 10:00 p.m.
- This means if we eat a modest meal in the evening, the stomach will produce a larger amount of acid than if the food was consumed at noon.
- Excess acid produced in response to a late-night meal fills up the stomach, and as food moves slowly along the digestive tract at night, this acid slowly creeps up and can come up to the mouth, causing acid reflux.
- Our food sits in the stomach for 2 to 5 hours, depending on how much we eat. Then it passes from the stomach to the intestines, where further enzymatic and chemical digestion continues. This marks the beginning of the intestinal phase. The intestines are not designed to handle the high acidity that is present in the stomach, so once the food enters the intestines, acid secretion is reduced and neutralized.
- Once food enters the intestines, it does not move by itself. Rather, it is squeezed along the digestive tract by muscles that surround the tube. This is called gut motility or gut contractility.
- Once food is fully digested and the nutrients absorbed, the waste by-product reaches the colon, the last part of the gut, and exits the body as stool, a full 24 to 48 hours later.
- This movement from intestines to elimination has a circadian rhythm: It is more active during the day, while at night the movement is very slow.
- Just like our muscles weaken as we age when we don’t engage them properly, our stomach muscle can also weaken.
- Instead of lying down and watching TV or other screens after dinner, a better habit to adopt is taking a short walk or doing some chores that require standing. Working with gravity, rather than against it, helps prevent reflux.
- Each type of food macronutrient—proteins, carbs, and dietary fats—is digested differently.
- Dietary fats are the most difficult to absorb. They require bile, produced in the liver and stored in the gallbladder, to convert them into an emulsion, which is later taken up in the small intestine and then in the bloodstream. Production of bile is strongly circadian.
- The absorption of glucose, amino acids, and fat is strongly circadian. Nutrient absorption requires a lot of energy, which is why it can’t happen all the time.
- During digestion, each macronutrient also activates different gut hormones.
- Many of the hormones and chemicals produced in the gut stimulate the brain to affect our emotions and cognition.
- when the stomach is empty, the hormone ghrelin signals the brain to feel hungry.
- After a meal, our ghrelin level goes down and makes us feel full so that we stop eating.
- Sleep reduces the production of ghrelin
- But when we don’t get enough sleep, even if our stomach is still digesting our last meal, our ghrelin level goes up and makes us think we are hungry.
- This reaction may be our body’s preparedness mechanism for our brain to make sure that we have enough energy for an unexpected emergency at night.
- one of the tricks to beat jet lag is to make sure that if you are up at night in the new time zone, you resist your temptation to eat until morning. Eating at the time appropriate to the new time zone is the best way to reset the gut clock.
- Every part of the digestive tract is filled with microbes or bacteria, each requiring a different environment to grow and thrive. Some bacteria like it more acidic, some more neutral; some like to feed on protein, some on fat or sugar; and each maintains its own eating-fasting rhythm.
- In other words, we go to bed at night with one set of bacteria in our stomach and wake up with a different set, and in the middle of the day a different set appears.
- Each type of bacteria has a different function and digests different types of nutrients.
- Therefore, maintaining a diverse mix of gut microbes is considered key to a healthy gut.
- One way to maintain a diverse gut microbiome is to eat a diet that has diverse sources of nutrition.
- Without all the right bacteria we cannot fully digest our food, and the rest is stored as fat.
- The food we eat and microbes in our gut work together to produce several hormones and chemicals that impact our mood and can determine whether we feel calm, anxious, depressed, manic, or panicky.
- The right amounts of gut bacteria convert some of our food into the neurotransmitters that keep our brain balanced and working effectively, including dopamine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), histamine, and acetylcholine.
- babies and toddlers, the unintended effect of diet and medications can have a lifelong impact. For instance, the gut microbiome is now increasingly recognized as a contributing factor in autism.
- When we don’t eat enough fiber, it’s like eating food with lots of preservatives: The microbes in our gut that have nothing else to eat will instead dine on the gut’s mucosal lining.
- When food arrives regularly at the same time, all the clock processes in the digestive system work together for efficient digestion and elimination, and the gut remains healthy. When food arrives at a time when the gut is not anticipating it, like in the middle of the night, that food may not be digested properly and can also interfere with the normal repair process of the gut and leave physical damage. Over time, such damages accumulate and can lead to diseases of the gut.
- we eat three meals every day, say at 8:00 a.m., 1:00 p.m., and 6:00 p.m., our gut learns to anticipate these meals, and it floods the gut with digestive enzymes and acids only after we start eating.
- If random eating continues for many weeks, acid reflux and heartburn (known as gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD) may become a permanent fixture in your life.
- This can cause both local inflammation in the gut and bodywide inflammation; those symptoms include general fatigue, joint pain, skin rashes, arthritis, and food sensitivities.
- We have recently noted that mice fed a standard diet eat small snacks here and there, and their bowel movements remain highly cyclical. When the same mice were fed highly processed food and allowed to eat all the time, they also pooped all the time, as if they had IBS. But restricting their diet to a few hours completely took care of their frequent pooping and restored the daily bowel movement cycle.
- Metabolism is the chemical reactions that occur in the body to use the nutrients we eat to produce energy, make the building blocks to repair and grow cells, and eliminate waste.
- As soon as we eat something, our pancreas releases insulin, which does two important jobs for metabolism: It helps absorb sugar from our blood into our liver, muscle, fat, and other tissues, and it signals these organs to convert some of the sugar to body fat. This process continues for up to 2 to 3 hours after we eat, every time we eat. So, as we keep on snacking, our body remains in fat-making mode.
- Only after 6 to 7 hours of not eating does our body begin to start burning some fat.
- Excess energy beyond what can be stored as glycogen is converted to fat and is stored as fat in our adipose tissue, or fat cells. When the adipose cells reach their full capacity, our body tends to store fat in cells or organs that are not designed to store it.
- First, reduced sleep confuses the brain hormones that regulate hunger. The brain cannot predict how long a person is going to stay awake, and since staying awake requires more energy than sleeping, the brain increases hunger hormone production.
- Sleep deprivation confuses the brain, making us choose unhealthy foods over healthier options. We crave energy-dense foods when we are overtired, and overeating these foods ultimately contributes to obesity.
- Every time we eat, our pancreas produces insulin to help the liver and muscles absorb blood sugar. At the same time, insulin promotes the biochemical pathway that makes fat from sugar. When we spread our calorie intake over a long period of time, it keeps insulin production active, which tells our organs to keep making body fat.
- If you have trouble controlling your after-dinner eating or if you wake up in the middle of the night to eat, you may be suffering from a rare medical condition called night eating syndrome (NES).
- It is generally believed that NES may result from depression, anxiety, stress, or poor results from attempts to lose weight.
- a week of reduced sleep can raise someone’s blood glucose to prediabetic levels.
- At least two different circadian clocks are responsible for controlling our glucose regulation mechanism to maintain a daily rhythm. The first circadian clock is in the pancreas, which programs insulin release to slow down to a drip at night. A second circadian clock in our brain produces higher levels of melatonin at night, which act on the pancreas to further suppress insulin release at night.9 Therefore, if we keep eating late into the night, when our pancreas is asleep, the low insulin drip is insufficient to instruct the liver and muscles to bring additional glucose inside their cells. This leaves the blood glucose levels dangerously high, causing further damage.
- We found another interesting connection between cholesterol and fat. TRE increases the level of an enzyme that breaks down cholesterol in the liver. Cholesterol is usually broken down into bile acids. TRE mice showed a reduction in their blood cholesterol to normal levels and a slight increase in bile acids. A small increase in bile acids is considered good as it triggers a program in fat cells to burn off fat.
- Scheduling Heart Surgery? Pay Attention to Your Code Time of day plays an important role in how well various medical treatments, from taking medications to surgery, work. In a study of 596 patients who underwent either morning or afternoon aortic valve replacement, during the 500 days following surgery, the incidence of major adverse cardiac events was lower for those people in the afternoon surgery group than in the morning group.13 The differences in circadian rhythms in gene expression over the course of a day may cause a person’s heart to heal more quickly in the afternoon than in the morning. These first few hours of healing strongly determine the outcome and long-term recovery, which is why you want your healing to coincide with your circadian rhythm.
- When the immune system is ineffective, it can start a cascade of reactions that ultimately create systemic or chronic inflammation.
- Diseases and symptoms of a nonoptimal immune system cover a wide swath, ranging from acne, aches, and joint pain to flu, asthma, liver diseases, cardiovascular diseases, colitis, rhinitis (or any other disease that ends with -itis), and multiple sclerosis.
- However, just like the major organs, the immune system has a circadian component, and if you can resync it, you can regulate its response.
- The bonding structure is made of proteins produced in the liver, which we know is strongly circadian.
- The clock genes play an important role in deciding how much of each type of immune cell our body should produce. When our clock system breaks down, it causes a cellular imbalance to our immune systems, producing more of one type of defense at the cost of another.
- The circadian clock also regulates the basic defense mechanism inside every cell, regardless of whether the cell is part of any immune system.
- The most common threat inside a cell is oxidative stress, which occurs as a direct result of additional oxygen molecules entering the cell. These molecules produce dangerous free radicals, electronically unstable oxygen molecules that must scavenge electrons from whatever sources they can find in order to become stable molecules. The sources of electrons can include cellular DNA, cell membranes, important enzymes, and vital structural or functional proteins. When these important cell parts and substances lose their electrons and bind to free radicals, their function is altered.
- Oxidative stress has been shown to be an important factor in many diseases because it leads to chronic and systemic inflammation.
- After eating, when every cell in our body uses nutrition to make energy, cells produce reactive oxygen species. The clock acts as a sensor of this oxidative state inside the cell and coordinates antioxidant defense mechanisms to clean up the damage.
- Another cellular activity is autophagy, the controlled digestion of bits and pieces of a cell, which helps to reduce some of the damage from oxidative stress.
- Cells recycle their stray bits and pieces through autophagy as their internal immune system locates them and puts them in a garbage disposal system, which is called the lysosome.
- Once the cellular garbage is broken down, the raw material inside can be used again to build new cellular parts.
- Autophagy is more active several hours after our last meal (after several hours of fasting and before the first bite of the day), and then slows down when we eat. Time-restricted eating is known to increase autophagy for a few hours during the fasting period.
- Mitochondria are microscopic organelles that are found inside every cell, but more in muscle cells. They are the principal sites where all of our energy is generated.
- A healthy circadian rhythm improves mitochondrial function, mitochondrial repair, and autophagy, which in turn improves overall cellular health.
- We have found that when we disrupt the circadian code in mice, every cell behaves as if it is under attack.
- Each immune system’s distinct tasks—surveillance, attack, repair, and cleanup—occur on a schedule and at different times of the day. This may seem counterintuitive, because you might think that all immune responses should be happening at the same time: when the threat is detected. However, staggering the operations serves a very important lifesaving purpose. When multiple arms of our immune system are activated at once, it can overwhelm our body and cause a state of shock from which we cannot recover. This is called septic shock. By completing these chores at different times, the body can adjust more easily to the changes that are happening.
- A large portion of the immune system is found in the gut, which is appropriate because the greatest number of potential invaders come in through the foods we eat or develop within the bacteria in our gut.
- Aside from the gut, there are other immune systems that are embedded in body fat, in our liver, and even in our brain. These immune systems act like security guards: Mostly they stand around waiting for something to happen.
- For instance, if the gut is breached and bacterial particles get into the blood and reach these tissue-embedded immune cells, it can cause systemic inflammation.
- Inflammation in the brain can contribute to depression, multiple sclerosis, and even schizophrenia.
- A strong circadian rhythm supports better repair of the skin and gut lining so that there is less opportunity for undigested food particles, disease-causing bacteria, or allergy-causing chemicals to enter our body and activate the immune system.
- The best defense in this case is a good offense: If you have to go to the hospital, make sure you have your best sleeping tools with you, especially a sleep mask and earplugs.
- If the body’s inflammation process is circadian, you would expect that many inflammatory diseases may exacerbate at certain times of the day or night. For instance, one of the most widespread inflammatory diseases among older adults is arthritis, causing inflammation and severe pain in the joints. Many people with arthritis notice that the severity of pain and stiffness is at its peak in the morning, making it difficult to get out of bed.
- In fact, scientists have found that the tolerability of nearly 500 medications improve by up to fivefold when they are matched to circadian scheduling.
- Preliminary studies have shown that morning vaccinations produce better protection than those given in the afternoon.
- TRE also reduces systemic inflammation throughout the body, including in our fat stores. When our body fat is used as an energy source, the amount of inflammatory fat and general cellular damage is reduced.
- And as systemic inflammation reduces, joint pain and stiffness will go away, making physical activity possible and enjoyable.
- In 2007, the World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer declared shift work that involved circadian disruption to be a “probable” carcinogen.
- when the immune system finds a cancer cell that’s 90 percent like a normal cell, it kills it. When this immune system is compromised, as happens under circadian disruption, many cancer cells escape a weak surveillance and grow to become life-threatening tumors.
- Ruth Patterson from the Moores Cancer Center at the University of California, San Diego, found that women who maintain a regular eating schedule and an 11-hour TRE are significantly protected from breast cancer.
- mistiming a drug led to worsened side effects.
- In one study, a group of researchers in Japan removed two-thirds of the liver in mice in either the morning or in the late afternoon. Mice that underwent liver surgery in the afternoon showed much faster liver regrowth than mice that had surgery in the morning.
- It’s very difficult to know when the brain is not functioning well. We have an enormous capacity to compensate for our deficits, and we often think our behavior is normal, even when it isn’t.
- It’s more likely that genetic and environmental factors interact to produce disease. This is true for life-threatening brain disorders as well as depression, anxiety, and even OCD.
- However, we do know that maintaining a strong circadian rhythm builds resilience against these brain diseases.
- A circadian clock is present in almost all brain regions, including the areas that are implicated in neuropsychiatric diseases. Although we do not completely understand how brain dysfunction starts or develops, the mechanisms of these diseases primarily involve four themes, and the circadian clock is involved in all of them:
- (1) Lack of emergence of new brain cells (neurons) that replace damaged or dead brain cells, causing a gradual decline in the number of healthy neurons:
- adult brains have special stem cells that produce new neurons throughout our lifetime. These new neurons replace damaged or dead neurons through a process called adult neurogenesis,
- reduced ability for neurogenesis contributes to a range of brain health dysfunction, from forgetfulness and memory loss to dementia.
- The circadian clock regulates several aspects of adult neurogenesis.
- (2) Poor wiring of neurons, causing misconnections/miscommunication between brain regions:
- An imbalance in the right amount of light (too little light during the day or too much at night) or an irregular sleep-wake cycle may leave a lasting impact in the form of a permanent change in sleep pattern, hypersensitivity to light, or even conditions like autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
- (3) The accumulation of damage, or lack of sufficient repair, and death of neurons: The circadian clock regulates the genes that are involved in reducing neuronal stress, promoting their repair so that neurons remain healthy. If any of the brain’s circadian clocks are disrupted, the neurons associated with it can become easily stressed, damaged, or die off, or the process that cleans up the mess can be affected, causing more stress and damage.
- (4) A brain chemical imbalance:
- Neurons make brain chemicals called neurotransmitters that are the messengers between nerve cells.
- Many of these neurotransmitters are under circadian clock control,
- When the clock is disrupted, the daily rhythm of brain chemical production becomes mistimed or is stuck at high or low levels.
- For example, when mice don’t have a clock in their brain, they produce too much dopamine—a neurotransmitter related to energy use in the body, metabolism, and activity.3 Too much dopamine makes both mice and men manic.
- Lack of light is linked to depression, and short winter days with barely 6 hours of daylight are a prime culprit.
- Even outside of the northern European countries, depression and suicide rates within whole populations increase as we move from the equator to higher latitudes, and the increase is seasonal, with increased depression in winter.
- A likely common thread between depression, seasonal affective disorder, and poor sleep at night (and feeling sleepy when we are awake) is the lack of sufficient bright light during the day.
- Does this mean that children raised in a circadian-disruptive light environment are destined to mental health issues, or that adult habits can trigger brain dysfunction? We don’t know for sure.
- A common theme of all neurological diseases is sleep disruption. Our daytime function is essentially a series of decisions that involve cognition and emotion. Sleep disruption affects this decision-making process. It is also commonly found in many psychiatric diseases, such as PTSD, anxiety, bipolar disorder, and more. It is also a prominent factor in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease and multiple sclerosis.
- So, whatever good habits you may have during the day, having a good night’s sleep is the best way to remove all the waste products from your brain.
- An overstressed and sleep-deprived brain produces proteins that are not correctly shaped. As these misshaped proteins build up, they can cause death of the brain cells: a hallmark of dementia.
- hormones from the gut can mistakenly get into the blood. These hormones can cross into the brain and affect brain function. One of these hormones is CCK-4, which is known to cause anxiety if it reaches the brain. TRE will reduce the gut hormones that can act on your brain and cause anxiety or panic attack.
- Exercise increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which strengthens the connection between neurons and improves memory. BDNF can further augment repair of stressed or injured neurons—the process that also occurs when a strong circadian clock is present in the brain.
- Having a strong circadian clock is a protection against the stresses of everyday life that affect our health. For instance, the stress hormone cortisol is under strong circadian regulation.
- In a second mechanism, the circadian clock itself can negate the effect of a sudden spike in stress hormone production so that after the stressor is gone, we can return to a normal state of mind.
- As you’ve learned, these perfect days set my clock for optimal health. But do they happen every day? Of course not.
- However, I try my best every day to get as many aspects of my circadian code as right as possible.
- We’re shooting for perfection, but sometimes good enough has to do.
